
                        THE BOOK OF LORE:
                            Foreword


  The Book of Lore was commissioned by Lord British, at the 
dawn of the Fifth Age, as a compendium of common 
knowledge to this date.  Its inspiration is the great prosperity 
and progress that has come about as a result of the defeat of 
the Triad of Evil and the rise of the Avatar ethic.  Its purpose 
is to keep alive our understanding of the past and the present 
as safeguards for a bright future.  The book also serves as a 
guide for youth and other travelers throughout Britannia.


	Folklore	2	History and folklegend
	Geography	6	Terrain and topography
	Government	8	Political policy and structure
        Economy         10      Industry, service, and the marketplace
	Settlements	12	Centers of civilization, urban and rural
	Populace	15	The people: adventurers and townefolk
	Transport	16	The many methods of travel
	Astronomy	18	Influences from the sky
	Language	19	Runes to the present day
        Music           20      Art and legend in sound
        Combat          21      Strategies for war and wilderness
	Armaments	23	Armour and weaponry
	Creatures	25	Beasts of land and sea
        Virtue          31      Elements of Avatarhood
        Magic           32      Reagents and the eight circles of magic

Folklore
Long before the ascendance to power of Lord British, Sosaria, 
as it was then known, was made up of numerous citystates.  
The eight largest and most enduring of these are today the 
eight leading townes in Britannia.
	Each citystate had its own ruler and some semblance of 
laws.  However, there was constant bickering for power and 
resources, which meant that the smaller states often fell prey 
to the aggressions of the larger.

The Crossing.
During this time, in another world, an idealistic youth was 
growing discouraged.  All around him, he saw people 
pursuing personal wealth and power.  Where were the heroes 
fighting for justice and prosperity for all people?  Was there 
no leader willing to seek the way to a better world for 
everyone?
	The youth took to spending his days roaming the hills.  
One autumn day, he came upon a rock-bordered clearing 
surrounded by towering oaks.  From a bed of dry leaves, the 
glint of metal caught his eye.  It was a silver medallion in the 
shape of a great serpent.  In his hand, the medallion felt 
unusually warm.
	Suddenly a line of blue light rose from the leaves, 
expanding into a door of shimmering light.  The youth stared, 
astonished, then stepped through.
	The door disappeared and autumn with it.  Green fields 
now surrounded the youth.  Feeling the medallion still in his 
hand, the youth slipped it into his pocket.  He detected a wisp 
of smoke rising above a grove of trees in the distance, and 
headed towards it.  There he surprised a slender, blond man 
chopping wood.  As the man looked up, the axe struck the 
wood awkwardly, glanced off, and opened a gash in his 
leatherclad leg.
	The youth rushed forward to help but the man put his 
hand up.  Concentration replaced the pain that had flashed 
across his face.  He knelt, touching his injured leg with one 
hand, tracing intricate patterns in the air with his other, and 
softly murmured.  The bleeding stopped.
	The man stood up, brushing woodchips from his clothes.  
He smiled broadly at the youth's amazement, then spoke with 
a deep voice.
	"Aye mek mye leg feelle na panne, and ayee haellede it, 
too.  Aye ought ha' kwit myne axynge.  But aye dinna ken 
thou'rt icumen."
	The youth's eyes grew huge.  He actually understood this 
strange, new language.  "But how did you heal your leg?"
	The man's eye's twinkled.  "Why, 'tis th' simplest of 
spelles.  Nay?"
	The man's name was Shamino.  That night, the youth 
stayed in Shamino's house.  The youth told Shamino about 
the land from which he came.  Shamino could not fathom 
such a land, but believed the lad was sincere and telling the 
truth.
	"What again was the name of thy birthplace?'
	"Cambridge," the youth replied, "in the British Isles.'
	Shamino thought for a minute, "I like that.  I shall call 
thee British."
	The youth laughed, but accepted his new name.
	Initially, British looked diligently for a way to return to 
his homeland, but over time his need to return to his own 
people lessened.  It was only after he gave up looking for a 
way back that he discovered one.  British made the journey 
several times.  In fact, it's believed he brought back close 
friends to dwell with him in his chosen world- Iolo the Bard 
and the knight Dupre are almost certainly his landsmen.  
Among the evidence of this is the aging process.  It appears 
that a decade in our world is equivalent to a single year in the 
homeland of British.  He and his countrymen age at one tenth 
the rate at which we age.
	Through the years, British's deeds demonstrated both 
wisdom and bravery.  As respect for him grew, British 
became the leader of a region of Sosaria including many 
citystates, and was awarded the title of Lord British.

The First Age of Darkness.
At the time British arrived at Shamino's, a native lad was 
growing up in Sosaria, being trained in the ways of sorcery.  
He was a moody youth, given to sudden rages and fits of 
despondency.  To offset the latter, he would take his dagger 
into the woods and hunt, leaving his prey to rot where they 
fell.  He would return to his manor restored, strong in the 
confirmation of his power over life and death.
	His name was Mondain, and Mondain's strange ways 
were a constant worry to his father, a busy, much respected 
mage.  When Mondain was fifteen, his father took a stand.
	"Thou shalt take a year off from magic, Mondain," his 
father said, "to improve thine attitudes and develop thy 
virtues.  I have arranged for thee to live with the brothers in 
the abbey, where thou shalt practice compassion and 
humility."
	"Learn thy lessons well, my son, and this ruby gem, 
which harnesses the power of the sun, shall be thine."
	Mondain said nothing.  The next night he slew his father 
and took the gem, for he was ready for power and his father 
was in his way.
	At the same time as Lord British was gaining a 
reputation for fair and honest government over his provinces 
and attracting attention for his startlingly innovative ideas, 
Mondain was using his father's gem against itself to produce 
a black jewel that would render him and his evil immortal.  
Success meant gaining even greater power over the minions 
of darkness.
	As terrors wrought by Mondain caused increasing unrest 
and dismay across Sosaria, British's ideas for unity of the 
citystates became more and more appealing.
	But the time was not quite ripe, for the widespread evil 
was beginning to take a tremendous toll.  Something new was 
needed, thought British.  He absently reached for the silver 
serpent he wore about his neck.  Touching it in 
contemplation, he envisioned the kind of hero Sosaria needed 
to deal with Mondain.
	Within days, a stranger arrived in Sosaria.  With utter 
devotion to truth and good, the stranger grew into a hero 
capable of facing Mondain.  Eventually, the heroic stranger 
found the malevolent gem and destroyed it, along with its 
creator.  With Mondain's destruction, the forces of evil began 
to wane.

The Second Age of Darkness.
But good was not to rise victorious for long.  Mondain's 
apprentice in sorcery was a beautiful young woman.  
Underestimated because of her youth, Minax was furious at 
the defeat of Mondain and at the destruction of the gem, 
whose existence she had surmised, and which she had 
intended to study and replicate for herself.
	Setting her fury aside, Minax decided to take control of 
the evils of the world without the gem.  She succeeded.  
Through her network of beasts and her own frightening 
power, she rained evil upon the world.
	Again Lord British sent out the call for a hero.  Again a 
stranger appeared.  Again the evil was hunted down and 
destroyed.  And with the destruction of Minax, this stranger 
was able to alter the future of the world from destruction to 
peace.

The Third Age of Darkness.
Decades passed in relative peace.  Good leaders of the 
citystates turned more and more to Lord British for guidance, 
and Sosaria became a united land under his rule.
	Then, one day, a sailor reported to Lord British the 
appearance of a hitherto unknown island, fiery and emanating 
terrifying evil.  Scouts began reporting malevolent 
occurrences that seemed to be the work of a great evil mind.
	Once more, Lord British sent out the call.  This time, 
four strangers appeared.  They survived the horrors of great 
dungeons and, with the help of the mystical timelord, the 
heroes found the secret island fortress of Exodus, the only 
progeny of Mondain and Minax, and annihilated it. 
	The Triad of Evil was destroyed, and great celebration 
ensued.  In honor of the day, they called the new world 
Britannia.

The Age of the Avatar.
Tremendous growth and prosperity characterized the Age of 
the Avatar.  The pursuits of scholarship, arts, and physical 
perfection flourished.  The great castles of learning were 
established to study the principles of Truth, Love, and 
Courage.  The eight citystates, now townes united under Lord 
British, were each dedicated to fostering the study and spread 
of a single virtue.  Thus, virtue blossomed and spread, science 
was born and began to grow at a healthy pace, and happiness 
became a reality.
	Now Lord British called for a single individual to be an 
example for his people.  A champion of great devotion and 
dedication, the stranger who answered discovered the Codex 
of Ultimate Wisdom within the Great Stygian Abyss.

The Closing of Doom.
After the downfall of the Triad of Evil, and even after the Age 
of the Avatar, eight terrible dungeons survived: Deceit, 
Despise, Dastard, Wrong, Shame, Covetous, Hythloth, and 
the Great Stygian Abyss.
	When Lord British summoned the Great Council, they 
determined both to raise and enshrine the Codex of Ultimate 
Wisdom and to seal the dungeons, those pits so conducive to 
the breeding of evil.  And so they did.  Thus ended the 
influence of great evil in the world.

Geography
	Britannia's terrain is rich in variety, from white sandy 
deserts to thick, lush forests to icy crags of towering 
mountains.

Land Terrain
The largest portion of Britannia is grassland.  Vast rich green 
grasslands and fertile farming land stretch the vision and fill 
the heart with promise.  For travelers, grasslands are fast and 
easy going.  Although grasslands afford no cover against the 
hostile creatures that roam them, they enable thee to see 
danger approaching and prepare for it.
	In the brush, seas of tall grass and scrubby shrubs, 
everything is as visible and as vulnerable as on the 
grasslands; only the going is slower and tougher. There is no 
advantage to traveling through the brush over grasslands, 
unless thou doth need to reach a point within it or it is well 
out of thy way to circumvent it.
	Forests cover nearly all of northwest Britannia.  The 
cool, redolent softness of the leaf-covered earth and the sweet 
air of the deep forests have enchanted many a traveler into a 
false sense of well-being in one of the most treacherous 
terrains.  Dense, dark, and mysterious, the forests are haven 
to all sorts of creatures.  Nor is the forest kind, for it allows 
no warning; a foe might be upon thee too quickly for thee to 
react.
	The deserts of northeastern Britannia are hot, dry, and 
easy to lose one's way in.  Besides all sand looking much like 
all other sand, the heat is apt to play tricks on the eye, 
misleading travelers with landmarks that are not really there.
	The hills are rustically beautiful, but climbing is time-
consuming, even when the rise is gentle.
	Mountains are rugged natural barriers for anyone 
without proper equipment.  Beware, however, of certain wild 
creatures to whom the rocky crags are home.  The highest 
peaks are simply impassable.
	Swamps are generally poisonous, yet some life-giving 
herbs grow nowhere else.  Some use the deadly mire as 
fortress against intrusion, for even monsters dislike venturing 
into the putrid muck.  At least, some monsters dislike it; there 
are rumors of rare and strange monsters that thrive on the 
swamps and use them to devour their victims.
	Besides the toxicity, slogging through the slime and hip-
deep ooze of the swamps is an extremely slow business.

Waters
Britannia's vast oceans are fed by many rivers and streams 
that find their origin in mountain lakes and jungle swamps.
	There are two major lakes: Lost Lake, in western central 
Britannia, feeds Lost River, which empties into the delta on 
the northwestern shore, by means of a network of tiny 
estuaries; Lock Lake. in north central Britannia, is actually a 
cutoff inlet from the sea and still has a mix of salt water.  
Britannia's third large lake, the one-time picturesque Lake 
Generosity, was a casualty of the great drought of the 
northeast and is now simply a bed of dry sand.
	Whether river, lake, or sea, shallows are bubbly and 
impassable for large ships; coastal waters are ripply, deep 
enough for tall ships, calm enough for small boats; and deep 
ocean waters are rough, bumpy, and dangerous for any but 
the largest frigates.
Government
Under Lord British, Britannia has undergone a great 
transformation from totalitarian monarchy to representative 
democracy in what is called a monarchic republic.  Instead of 
the single rule of the king, Lord British, Britannia is ruled by 
a combination of Lord British and a council comprised of 
representatives from each of the eight major townes.  
Although his intent for the future was that each towne elect 
its representative to the council, the first council was deter-
mined by appointment.  British traveled to each towne, 
spending long hours with its leaders to determine the right 
choice for the first council.
	The historic first meeting of the Great Council consisted 
of two parts.  First, Lord British met with the council 
members and outlined his vision of participatory government.  
It was as follows:
	This council and Lord British would begin to build a 
document, based on nature and reality, that set forth those 
rights of the people that should never be usurped.  British 
believed that the eight virtues of the Avatar would play a 
major role in the nature of the document.  Once adopted, the 
document would be binding on everyone, including Lord 
British himself.
	Each year, a council member would be elected by each 
towne.  That council member would conduct towne meetings 
at regular intervals to determine problems in the towne and to 
become acquainted with the needs and interests of the people.  
Several times a year, at regular intervals, the council member 
would travel to Britain to sit on the Great Council. 
	The council would ponder problems that occurred in 
Britannia and decide if the problems were in the purview of 
government.  If so, they would determine the course of action 
government should take, perhaps writing a law, perhaps 
repealing a law, perhaps altering ways and means.
	Council recommendations would then be presented to 
British, and he could accept them or object to them.  If he 
objected, his own rules would require him to sit with the 
council to try to work out solutions acceptable to all.  
Nevertheless, Lord British reserved to himself the power of 
veto in the event that agreement could not be reached.
	At that first gathering of the council, Lord British 
withdrew from the meeting after presenting his plan, 
directing the council to discuss the ideas and his rule in 
general.
	After several days, the council was ready to present its 
findings.  Its members were unanimously in favor of the new 
government plan Lord British had presented, and so it was 
enacted.
	The first meeting continued for one month.  Half the time 
was spent pounding out the new constitution and half the 
time was spent discussing affairs in what was to become 
normal council fashion.  Since that time the council meets for 
two weeks four times a year, beginning on the solstices and 
the equinoxes.
	The monarchy continues in some respects.  The crown 
jewels, for example, continue to define the office of ruler, 
both figuratively and, by their magic content, truly.  These 
precious emblems consist of the jewel encrusted gold crown, 
believed to contain a perfect ray of sunlight; the pure gold 
sceptre, topped by the crystal orb of power; and the silver 
amulet, in the shape of the mighty earth serpent, said to have 
come from another world.

Economy
The chief industry of Britannia is farming, but it is the 
distribution of farm products and other goods through a wide 
network of merchants that is most visible.  Pubs and inns 
thrive throughout Britannia, forges of weapons and armour 
for stalwart adventurers are common, and healers and the 
sellers of herbs and reagents flourish.

Farming
Farming is the major occupation in most rural areas.  Farms 
produce wheat, corn, barley, and, in season, all the sumptuous 
fruits and vegetables Britannians love.

Merchants
Many shoppes and enterprises are available to citizens and 
knights throughout the land.  Armouries provide a market for 
both weapons and armour.  Most armouries will consider 
buying used equipment, as they recognize the likelihood that 
one will then need new.  The prices they will pay vary, but 
expect not nearly full value, as they must make a profit on 
resale.  The types of goods sold also vary among armouries; 
shoppers may have to visit many armouries to find the wares 
they seek.
	Stables are not found in many cities, but there are a few 
in castles and private residences that will consider selling to 
the public.  Most stables deal in strong plough horses, rugged 
mountain horses, swift steppes horses, and a few even have 
Valorian steeds, which are most excellent war horses.  All 
carry full supplies for the well equipped rider.
	Meals purchased at markets or in restaurants are often 
delicious and comfortably filling, but will not sustain 
travelers long on the road.  Most markets offer travelers packs 
of rations in quantity.  Prices vary greatly from towne to 
towne.
	Pubs are oft found in markets and inns.  Good ale and 
stout is complemented by a well-cooked leg of mutton, a fresh 
pheasant, or a juicy side of beef.  A good customer may find 
the chef offering a taste of the day's special and of the local 
gossip as well.
	Some of the best eating houses and pubs have music 
provided by minstrels.  Do not hesitate to speak to the 
musicians and let them know how much their work is 
appreciated.  Some musicians may have something 
interesting to tell, or may become friends or supporters.
	Pub owners are a friendly lot.  They chat with their 
clientele and they listen well.  A good tipper may learn 
something very interesting in a pub.
	Healers have shoppes in many cities and villages, and in 
some castles and keeps.  Bold knights frequently incur serious 
wounds.  Poison and plague also take their toll.  Fortunately, 
medicine is advanced in the treatment of just these problems.  
While it is hard to say any price is unfair for saving a life, 
some healers are known for their reasonable prices and others 
are not.  Skara Brae's healer has been known to heal even 
those who cannot pay at all.
	Few health problems are beyond the ken of the healers, 
whether disease, wounds, or poison.  Some healers are even 
experimenting with the concept of resurrection.  There have 
rumbled persistent rumors of magical resurrection techniques 
being used by extremely adept mages within closeknit, secret 
groups.  There is still some controversy over whether such 
techniques should be pursued, but Lord British is known to 
have supported the research at every turn.
	Apothecaries are experts in growing and preparing 
herbs and reagents for use in magic.  Shoppes generally offer 
mostly locally available reagents, although some apothecaries 
have better facilities for importing than others.  Climate and 
terrain have a lot to do with plant availability and the 
consequent variable prices.  Shop carefully, for the shoppe 
that has the best price on one herb or reagent may have the 
worst on another.
	Inns are a source of pride for several Britannian townes 
and villages.  They are comfortable and reasonable and 
usually provide a good, healing night's rest.  The inn in the 
island city of Skara Brae even boasts a magnificent view.
Most inns also provide for long stays.  If a party member has 
a long-term need for lodging, the party can rent a room by the 
month and pick up the friend at a later date.
	Shipwrights are found in several port cities.  These are 
where frigates and skiffs are built.  Since shipbuilders are 
usually busy building ships, their shoppe hours are often short 
and sporadic.  When the shipwright is in, one can buy skiffs 
alone, which are not very expensive, or frigates, which are 
very expensive and generally come with skiffs on board.
	Guilds carry the ancient symbol of the thieves' trade, 
though many a good adventurer oft has need of their goods.  
In olden times, guilds sold such items as lockpicks, various 
kinds of glasses for seeing what the naked eye cannot, 
equipment for working clandestinely in the dark, and the like.
	The Government, symbolized by the crown and the 
scales of justice, has its seat in the castle of Lord British, the 
king.  But the government offices, where the day-to-day 
administration takes place, reside in Yew, the towne of 
justice.  This centre houses the high court of justice and the 
public prison for all Britannia.

Settlements
The Castles
The Castle of Lord British.  Headquarters and home of Lord 
British, located on Britanny Bay.  Those aspiring to the Way 
of the Avatar should become very familiar with this 
landmark.  The marble and tile castle has been enlarged and 
improved since the Age of the Avatar.  Now five stories, the 
castle has among its many features two kitchens, an excellent 
armoury, a rooftop observatory, and the finest stable in the 
land.
	The Lycaeum.  In the northwestern comer of Verity Isle, 
ever searching the skies, the observatory tower that crowns 
Britannia's centre of learning can be seen from many leagues 
across the ocean.  Libraries and laboratories, writing desks 
and discussion rooms, and every known tool for the 
discerning of truth are housed here.
	Empath Abbey.  Nestled quietly against the sheltering 
trees of the Deep Forest, just southwest of Yew, this cloister 
of love lies open to all of good heart.  Here, by the shores of 
the calming sea, the sisters and brothers of Empath Abbey 
retreat to meditate, growing ever nearer to understanding and 
answers that will benefit us all.
	Serpent's Hold.  Staunchly guarding the deep harbor of 
the Isle of Deeds, itself bulwarked by mountains and streams, 
the Serpent's Hold stands as a monument to the courage of all 
those who fight for good.  In this stronghold are gymnasiums 
to hone thy body and training fields on which to hone thy 
battle skills.  Here also are healers to tend thy wounds, and 
sunny strands to heal thy soul.  And finally here too are 
comrades in arms sharing stories of honor, valor, triumph, 
and restraint which are perhaps the greatest teachers and 
healers of all.
The Townes and Villages
Britain.  Principal towne of the Empire of Britannia, the busy 
seaport of Britain lies in central Britannia on Britanny Bay.  
Because of the large number of visitors to Lord British's castle 
who pass through or headquarter in Britain, the bards 
headquartered in this towne of compassion and the arts put 
their emphasis on hospitality.  Britain has a large hotel and 
outstanding pubs and food.  There is also an armoury wherein 
thou canst buy the finest bows made.
	The Britannys.  These three important suburbs recently 
sprung up around Lord British's castle provide many of the 
goods and services needed by the court of Lord British.  East 
Britanny specializes in shipbuilding and boasts a fine healer.  
North Britanny offers a small, rustic inn and fine stables 
among its several farms.  West Britanny is a farming towne, 
supplying its own needs and those of the four surrounding 
settlements, including the Castle of Lord British and Britain.
	Buccaneer's Den.  This island village lies due east of 
Paws.  Said to be a centre for thieves and blackguards to this 
day, Buccaneer's Den is a thriving towne that offers some 
exotic shopping, as well as an inn, restaurant, armoury, and 
shipbuilder.
	Cove.  The magical village of Cove nestles among the 
mountains south of Lock Lake.  Cove's healers and alchemists 
are among the best in Britannia.  Here too is the magnificent 
temple of virtue, built to honor those on the quest of the 
Avatar.
	Jhelom.  Far off the mainland, among the mountains on 
the central and largest of the Valorian Isles, the bustling 
towne of Jhelom provides food and lodging to visitors as well 
as to its fighters and students of valor. A fine armoury and 
shipwright ensure safe access to the mainland.
	Minoc.  This towne in north central Britannia is 
renowned for the fine metalwork and armour of its tinkers.  
Minoc is the centre for studying the virtue of sacrifice.  The 
homeless of Britannia are welcomed in Minoc; here they find 
refuge in the Mission of the Helpless, with ready access to a 
fine and charitable healer.
	Located on the northern coast, Minoc has a large 
shipwright as well as its famous armoury.
	Moonglow.  Honesty and the quest for truth is foremost 
to the mages of Moonglow, in fact, they abide no dishonesty 
and have no room for those who do.  This towne, tucked on a 
southern tip of Verity Isle, has good food, reasonably priced 
herbs, and a fine observatory.  There are rumors that thou 
mayst see thy future here.
	New Magincia.  A towne built on the ruins of old 
Magincia by a colony of humble people who understand well 
the dangers of false. self-serving pride and the beauty of 
humility.  New Magincia has a healer and a restaurant tucked 
among its numerous modest farms and orchards.
	Paws.  A village nestled on a cove near the southern edge 
of the Fens of the Dead, midway between Britain and Trinsic, 
Paws provides food and shelter for the traveler, as well as a 
change of horses.
	Skara Brae.  A centre for rangers, Skara Brae is a city 
immersed in the study of spirituality.  The city lies on the 
southernmost of three isles just west of Spiritwood.  A gentle 
towne of kind, thoughtful, and generous people, Skara Brae 
houses a fine but inexpensive inn, an excellent apothecary, 
and a healer who uses physical, magical, and spiritual 
medicine.  Those in need are always welcome at the Skara 
Brae healer, and can be healed regardless of their wealth.
	Trinsic.  On a grassy plain on the southeastern shore of 
Britannia, Trinsic's honorable paladins impress visitors with 
their courage and devotion to truth.  A sunny towne of marble 
buildings and shaded parks, Trinsic has a lovely pond, an 
armoury, a healer, and a fine stable.
	Yew.  Long a gathering place for druids in their pursuit 
of justice, Yew is the site of the Supreme Court of Britannia 
and nurtures the great legal and judicial minds who practice 
there.  Besides the courts, jail, and penal areas, Yew has one 
of the best restaurants, with a fine pub, an armoury, and an 
apothecary.  Nestled beneath the trees of the deep forest, Yew 
is second in population only to Britain.

The Keeps
Keeps are fortified manors, often isolated, away from townes 
and villages.  While many are personal retreats, some are 
schools for young people, cloisters, and organizations.

The Lighthouses
Rustic lighthouses were built throughout Britannian waters 
during the recent years of peace; their bright presence has 
dramatically lowered the number of ships breaking up on 
reefs and shoals in dark and storms.

Populace
Adventurers are generally categorized by professional 
affiliation: mages, bards, and fighters.  Druids, magicians 
who draw their very powers from nature and natural 
phenomena, are regarded as a subset of mages.  Tinkers are 
bards with a special knack for building or repairing who serve 
as keepers of our oral history as they move from towne to 
towne.  And paladins, shepherds, and rangers, long having 
fought valiantly at the side of the elite fighters from the 
Valorian Isles, are generally associated with fighters.
Of course mages, bards, and fighters are not always 
adventuring.  Often they may be found among the general 
populace along with villagers, merchants, minstrels, jesters, 
farmers, beggars, and guards.

Mages
Mage is the title subsuming all Britannians endowed with full 
magic powers and for whom magic is primary.  Mages tend to 
settle in Moonglow, enjoying its proximity to the scholarly 
and esoteric treasures of the Lycaeum; indeed, many 
youngsters who show magical leanings early are sent to live 
with groups of mages near the Lycaeum and are schooled in 
its ways from an early age.  Others favor Yew for its 
emphasis on nature.
	Skill in magic requires serious study.  With such 
sedentary childhoods it is no wonder that most mages are not 
very strong.  Do not, however, take that to mean they are not 
healthy; as a group, mages tend to live longer than any 
others.

Bards
Bards excel in dexterity and poise.  They rightly choose 
professions that make good use of their talented hands and 
agile bodies: minstrel, archer, locksmith, and tinker are just a 
few.  Fearless in battle, bards are often as quick of mind as of 
hand and their magic abilities are keen, although their power 
for magic is half that of mages.
	Britain is a favorite gathering place of many bards.  
Others, especially tinkers, are based in Minoc.

Fighters
In the isolation of the Valorian Isles, valorous fighters are 
trained in the arts of battle.  Strong and fearless, the fighters 
of Jhelom can overcome any known foe.  They are trained in 
all weapons and they show dexterity in all armour.  Most 
fighters prefer the sword or bludgeoning weapon, for they 
have the strength to wield the heaviest two-handed sword and 
to do extreme damage with it.
	Often found fighting beside the best of Jhelom are the 
paladins of Trinsic, the fierce rangers of Skara Brae, and the 
humble shepherds of New Magincia. 
	Although fighters enjoy the advantages of magic, they do 
not practice it and seldom show any tendencies of talent in 
that direction.  They do show an almost magical intuition 
about animals: no people train horses or outthink monsters 
better than fighters.

Transportation
Most traveling in Britannia is done on foot, even though it is 
rough going, slow and dangerous.  There are alternatives for 
those who can afford and handle them.

Horses
Many travelers enjoy riding on horseback: it is faster, less 
tiring, and a lot safer than walking, since horses can outrun 
many of the hostile types of creatures.  Know, though, that 
horses cannot travel over water and are apt to wander away 
(with or without encouragement) if not properly secured when 
left.

Ships
Visiting island communities requires travel by ship.  Despite 
rather outlandish rumors of people wandering the heavens in 
great airships, sailing on water is the fastest and most popular 
long-distance mode of transportation there is.  The most 
common watercraft on the ocean are frigates.  Tall, stately 
three-masters, the frigates cut through seas swiftly and 
smoothly.  They generally have a two-level open deck and a 
below-deck with a forward cabin, rear bunkroom, and centre 
cargo hold.  Most ocean going frigates are built to 
accommodate heavy cannons for broadside fighting and have 
two gangplank gateways on each side.
	Speedy it is, but ocean travel is fraught with dangers, 
especially after dark near rocky coasts.  Many unpleasant 
monsters populate the deep, and pirate ships are always on 
the lookout for moneyed prey.

Skiffs
Small double-lock rowboats, used as lifeboats on frigates, 
skiffs can make their way through all but the shallowest mud 
or swamp.  Widely used for exploration of riverheads and 
mountain streams, they are also occasionally found being put 
to more recreational uses in townes.  They provide a 
charming way to follow the little estuaries that crisscross 
Britannia.  In fact, there are said to be little-known places 
unreachable by any other means.  However, skiffs are unsafe 
on deep ocean waters.

Navigation
Speed is critical on the open seas.  There are many dangerous 
inhabitants of the deep who will overtake and attack slow 
ships.  Speed is optimized by traveling perpendicular to the 
wind.  Angling directly into the wind affords only the slowest 
passage possible.  When the wind dies completely, there is no 
option but to resort to the oars.
	Too close to shore, speed can be fatal, and sails should be 
replaced with oars for careful maneuvering.  Unfortunately, 
many foolhardy captains have run their ships up on reefs and 
shoals at full speed under sail, losing ship and crew.  Those 
that survive such wrecks have had to hole up and repair their 
vessels.  Since extensive repairs take quite a while to 
accomplish, it is important to hole up in safe harbors for this 
repair work.

Astronomy
The definitive work in astronomy is Celestial Britannia by Sir 
John, astronomer and scribe at the Lycaeum.  This passage is 
comprised of excerpts from his book recording his scientific 
discoveries and documenting Britannian astral theories that 
predate the emergence of science.
	In the heaven beyond our skies, dwell stars whose 
numbers are beyond our reckoning.  Within our heaven, 
circling our world, sweeps our bright sun.  Ten other orbs 
trace tight paths around our world.  The twin moons 
Trammel and Felucca are desolate, their light only a 
reflection of the sun's brilliance.
	The other eight orbs are thought by some to be planets 
like our own.  According to the roles they play in our many 
legends, they have been named for the virtues of the Avatar.  
The closest is Honesty, followed further out by Compassion, 
Valor, Justice, Sacrifice, Honor, Spirituality, and Humility.
	Many tales are told of knights traveling from towne to 
towne, even across water, merely by stepping into a wall of 
light.  There are few verifiable reports of moongate travel.  
However, sifting through those reports that are verifiable, it 
has become clear that they operate as follows.
	Each night at the apex of the first moon, Trammel, the 
eight moongates appear, rectangles of shimmering blue light 
rising from the ground.  They remain until Felucca reaches 
her apex.  While the moongates are open, a traveler entering 
one will be instantly transported to another moongate in a 
different locale.
	The traveler's destination is determined by the phase of 
the moon closest to midheaven.  Moongate travel is said to be 
fast and safe; however, there have been confusing and 
conflicting reports of what transpires when the moons are 
equidistant in the midheaven.  Moongate travelers should 
exercise caution.
	Over the ages, comets, fiery nebulae, have tom through 
our skies as harbingers of impending doom.  They appeared 
just before the emergence of the Dark Lord Mondain.  They 
heralded the reign of the Enchantress Minax, and they 
foretold the impending danger of the hellborn Exodus.
	Now, while we live in the midst of peace and 
enlightenment, the comets have begun again.

Language
The language of Britannia is rich and poetic.  It is derived 
from Old Sosarian, which varies mostly from the widespread 
current language in its alphabet, which is more runic than 
today's.  The old runes continue to be used widely in rural 
areas, and there is a movement to increase their familiarity to 
city people.  Still, among the citybom, translation of runic 
messages, letter for letter, is sometimes necessary.  The Runic 
Alphabet is the earliest known system of writing sounds using 
runes or letters.  The most commonly used runes follow, with 
their modem equivalents.


Music
Music is much loved throughout Britannia.  Those wealthy 
enough often own a harpsichord, and the better pubs employ 
good lute playing minstrels to entertain their patrons.
Without question the best known name in folkmusic is that of 
Iolo FitzOwen.  "Stones," a ballad about the mystic shrines, 
has long been popular among bards and the commonfolk.  It 
is known to be a favorite of His Majesty, Lord British, as well.  
FitzOwen's masterwork, with lyrics by his wife Gwenllian 
Gwalch'gaeaf, is a sample of fine music.

Stones
Long ago ran the sun on a folk who had a dream
And the heart and the will and the power:
They moved earth; they carved stone; moulded hill and 
channeled stream
That we might stand on the wide plains of Wiltshire.

Now men asked who they were, how they built and wonder 
why
That they wrought standing stones of such size.
What was done 'neath our shade?  What was pray'ed 'neath 
our skies
As we stood on the wyrd plains of Wiltshire.

Oh what secrets we could tell if you'd listen and be still.
Rid the stink and the noise from our skirts.
But you haven't got the clue and perhaps you never will.
Mute we stand on the cold plains of Wiltshire.

Still we loom in the mists as the ages roll away
And we say of our folk, "they are here!"
That they built us and they died and you'll not be knowing 
why
Save we stand on the bare plains of Wiltshire.

Combat
Three important lessons have been derived from the great 
battles with evil in our past.  The foremost is that neither 
magic, nor prowess at arms, nor purity of spirit alone is 
enough to defeat evil.  Only the careful coordination of arms 
with magic by the virtuous will bring victory.  The second 
lesson is basic: prowess comes only with practice and 
experience.  The third lesson is this: the use of force against 
the innocent will always bring retribution.
	Armaments have improved greatly over the years.  
Today's knights have a great selection of weapons and armour 
at their disposal.  In addition, fortunate knights may come 
across magical rings and amulets to wear or use.  Before 
battle, knights can ready several items of equipment carried 
by their party: helms, shields, suits of armour, and weapons 
from daggers to halberds.  Weapons can be dropped or 
exchanged in the midst of battle, but no enemy has ever 
waited while a knight changed armour.
	Strength and endurance may get a knight through a few 
battles, but none survive long without developing tactical 
skills.  Successful knights learn to watch for mistakes the 
enemy makes.  Successful leaders learn to design strategies 
around the strengths and weaknesses of their party.
	In particular, fighters are known for their strength and 
ability to wield great weapons while wearing the heaviest of 
armour.  In general, they are most effective when formed into 
a shield wall in the frontmost ranks.  There are exceptions- 
desperate situations where an offensively well-armed fighter 
may do well to charge headfirst into enemy ranks, attacking 
the key members.
	Bards, while weaker than fighters, are proficient archers 
because of their keen sight and excellent dexterity.  Their 
dexterity also enables them to regroup faster and strike more 
blows against their opponents.
	Mages, who are not as strong, often prefer to avoid 
warfare entirely, spending their time instead in scholarly 
pursuits.  However, those mages who choose to defend the 
crown are among the most fearsome foes of evil.  An 
accomplished archmage may annihilate an entire horde of 
monstrous enemies with a single spell.
	Missile weapons such as bows and crossbows are 
essentially useless in hand-to-hand combat; nearby foes are 
apt to seize the opportunity to interfere with an archer's fire as 
they do with a magic user's spellcasting, For this reason, 
mages and bow-wielders are generally best placed behind a 
cover of fighters, where they can effectively deliver their 
blows.  However, when a spell of cataclysmic and widespread 
effect is needed, a mage often must venture to the front lines 
and seek a niche in the shield wall from which to cast his 
spell, so the spell will not act to destroy friends as well as 
enemies.

Armaments
Armoury
The most courageous knight shows good sense to wear strong 
armour on any expedition.  Full body armour, helmets, 
shields, magical rings and jewelry, and other magical trinkets 
are all worthwhile; but they are also expensive.
	Body armour comes in a range of styles and degrees of 
effectiveness.
	Cloth.  Usually little more than a heavy quilted 
gambeson worn below a tunic, cloth armour is inexpensive 
and comfortable.  But it affords only limited protection.
	Leather.  A cut above cloth, yet also fairly inexpensive, 
leather armour is made from thick leather hardened by 
boiling, often in paraffin.
	Scale.  Fashioned from four to six inch square 
overlapping plates attached to cloth or leather gambeson, 
scale armour looks like its namesake: fish scales.  Although 
scale is often somewhat noisy, it offers good protection.
	Chain.  Chain mail is fashioned from small loops of 
metal wire linked in a manner to make something resembling 
metal cloth.  The best chain mail has each link actually 
riveted shut.  Chain mail provides very good protection but is 
quite expensive.
	Plate.  Custom-made from hand-forged sheets of metal, 
plate armour affords its wearer the most complete protection 
possible.  However, it is very expensive and can be borne by 
only the strongest.
	Helms often match body armour in material and 
strength, but variations, such as offensively spiked helmets, 
are available.
	Shields also vary greatly.  Not all war rigs call for 
shields- any use of two handed weapons precludes them and 
they require some strength yet many thank shields for their 
lives.

Weaponry
The weapon is the most important material choice an 
adventurer has to make.  A wide range exists.
	Daggers offer two choices.  The common dagger is 
useful when its ability to be concealed is a benefit; and it can 
be thrown in open combat.  The main gauche is more 
formidable, especially when used as a second weapon.
	Swords continue to be the most popular weapon.  There 
are long and short swords, and two-handed swords.
	Missile weapons are carried by most experienced knights 
no matter what weapon they keep ready in their hand.  It is 
always an advantage to fell thine enemy from afar when 
possible, before the threats of his hand weapons can reach 
thee.  Inexpensive and easy to port is the sling, and 
ammunition is plentiful in open country.  Bows come from 
craftsmen in the deep forest.  Made from strong and resilient 
yew, bows, and their stronger counterparts, crossbows, make 
formidable long-range weapons.  Be aware, however, that one 
engaged in hand-to-hand combat is unlikely to be able to load 
such a weapon, much less shoot it.
	Some knights prefer missiles they can hurl without 
mechanical aid.  Popular throwing weapons include daggers, 
spears, axes, and flasks of flaming oil.
	The effectiveness of most weapons depends upon the 
dexterity of the weapons' wielders, but mass weapons are 
often preferred by the very strong, if not so nimble, because 
these bludgeons depend upon the great strength of the wielder 
to crush through an opponents' defenses rather than evade 
them.
	Oldest of all bludgeons, and probably of all weapons, is 
the club.  Clubs are crude weapons, but when a blow connects 
it often does the trick.  The mace is much more streamlined 
than the club.  Its weight is balanced to derive the most 
possible effect with the most possible accuracy.  A "mace on a 
chain" is the morning star, which reaches over obstacles to 
smite thy foe at range.  One blow straight on from this and 
the enemy is out till morning- at least.  Finally, there is the 
two-handed hammer.  It takes great strength to wield it, but 
the hammer can inflict devastating damage.
	Polearms require much strength to wield but they're 
extremely effective.  Most popular among those strong 
enough to wield it is the halberd, a long stout staff with a 
battleax blade at the end that allows its wielder to strike a foe 
at twice the distance of most weapons.

Creatures
Wild creatures, intelligent and not, roam the countryside; 
others frequent the waters.  Few of these creatures are evil; 
but many attack out of hunger or when surprised.

Creatures of the Land and Sky
	Insect Swarms.  Pesty insects have little muscle or brain, 
but their tiny size lets them move quickly, dodging and 
feinting.  They bite more often than they miss, but their sting 
does little damage.  Once hit, all insects are easily squashed.  
Rare is the insect that delivers a fatal bite, but a swarm of 
thousands can mean death.
	Bats.  These annoying creatures live by night, usually, 
and travel in flocks.  Often their high pitched screech is heard 
before they are seen.  Though flighty and hard to hit, bats are 
not difficult to kill.  As attackers they are relentless and 
vicious.
	Giant Rats.  Natural agility and sharp teeth are rats' 
chief advantages.  They are not strong and do not hit very 
hard.  The mortal danger rats pose to knights comes from 
their capacity for passing on noxious germs and substances.  
Seldom do knights tangle with rats without someone in the 
group becoming ill with poison.  At worst, the result of such 
an encounter is infection with plague.
	Slimes.  In appearance, slimes are gooey green splats.  
They are weak, clumsy, and not very damaging, individually.  
But they almost always travel in schools and, when a slime is 
hit, it is apt to split into two healthy, hostile slimes.  If the 
slime does not split, it succumbs quite easily.  Slimes carry no 
booty.
	Giant Spiders.  Although weak and slow, spiders take 
their toll: they poison, both on touch and by spitting venom 
from a distance.  Spiders have been known to carry a few 
goods.
	Snakes.  Extremely poisonous and quite accurate when 
shooting their poison even from a distance, snakes are 
otherwise relatively harmless.  They are easy to destroy, once 
engaged directly.
	Orcs.  Orcs are often more annoying than dangerous to 
the seasoned adventurer, but they can be a grave threat to the 
novice, especially when they travel in large groups or 
accompanied by a giant or two.  Generally, they are fairly 
easy to defeat, do a modicum of damage if they hit, and carry 
meager belongings.
	Trolls.  Large misshapen humanoids that like to live 
underground, trolls are strong and dextrous and can cause 
moderate damage to their victims.  Fortunately, they are not 
very enduring.  Trolls tend to lie in wait to ambush 
unsuspecting travelers.  Trolls like treasures and often carry 
some with them.
	Ettins.  Strange two-headed creatures, Ettins hurl large 
boulders with enough strength to do considerable damage.  
Though not magical, they are quite hardy and often carry a 
good many interesting belongings.
	Gremlins.  The blow of a gremlin is hardly felt, and he is 
not very hard to do in; but beware, for he travels in huge 
packs and he may leave you starving.  The gremlin's ability to 
consume food at an inordinate rate is startling and dismaying.  
Once overcome, he usually leaves some goods.
	Headlesses.  No one knows exactly how the senses work 
on these mutant abominations.  Do they sense the world only 
through touch and feeling?  Or do they "see" with some inner 
vision?  Whatever the answer, these relatively strong 
creatures are fairly enduring and do mild damage to their 
foes.  They tend to carry goods with them.
	Gazers.  Giant, magical floating eyes, gazers mesmerize 
their foes, turning them against each other.  They make up for 
their weak, clumsy physique with strong intelligence and a 
fairly good constitution.
	Mimic.  Masters of imitation, mimics make themselves 
so like treasure chests that many an adventurer has met his 
doom trying to open one.  Mimics have little courage and 
even less patience, though, so if one is willing to wait a few 
minutes just step a few steps away from suspect chests, they 
are apt to reveal themselves by shooting poison.  Close up, 
mimics bludgeon with strength and dexterity, doing 
unpleasant damage.  Getting past their deadly deceptions can 
reveal fine treasure.
	Reapers.  The strange, magical creatures known as 
reapers are strong, enduring, and do severe damage by 
bludgeoning.  Their weakness, if it can be so called, is their 
immobility; although their arms strike out about them, they 
cannot change locations.  They throw magical bolts at distant 
foes.  They also bludgeon nearby creatures with their thick 
tentacles.  Reapers are quite hardy, but often worth the 
trouble: they hoard good booty.
	Wisps.  It simply is not known exactly what a wisp is.  
Harmless looking little bits of flashing light, wisps are 
extremely agile and highly intelligent.  Although they are not 
strong, they do serious damage, taking their victims by 
surprise again and again, blow after blow.  They often attack 
in large groups and they teleport from place to place on the 
battlefield.  Worst of all, they can magically possess members 
of the opposing party.  Wisps seem to have impossible strong 
constitutions and are quite difficult to destroy.
	Sand Traps.  Sand traps burrowing in the sand are 
nearly impossible to notice, but a party passing too close to 
one is in for trouble.  Strong and agile, these desert monsters 
strike out at anything that comes near their hiding places, and 
they hit very hard.  They are also very hardy, and their 
endurance has meant the demise of more that one adventurer.  
When a sand trap is overcome, however, generous treasure is 
revealed in the sand.
	Dragons.  Strongest and most feared of creatures, 
dragons shoot extremely damaging magic fireballs and are 
nearly impossible to defeat.  They may do in an entire party 
before it has a chance to engage in close combat.  Killing a 
dragon, however, can earn the slayer great treasure.

Creatures of the Sea
	Sharks.  Strong and agile in water, sharks are not 
particularly intelligent and cause little damage to creatures 
that are not in the water, despite their frightening appearance.  
They can endure quite a beating before dying.
	Sea Horses.  These graceful, appealing ocean creatures 
have nasty personalities.  They enjoy shooting foes at range, 
which they do very effectively.  They are also rather strong, 
flexible, even intelligent, and they take a fair amount of 
punishment to be defeated.
	Squids.  Squids are unintelligent, but the dexterity of 
their tentacles makes their considerable strength a real 
menace.  They throw their poisonous ink from a distance, and 
it is always very damaging.  These unpleasant sea creatures 
are hardy and difficult to overcome.
	Sea Serpents.  These serpents can appear from nowhere 
to rock a ship.  Capable of launching great fireballs from a 
considerable distance - even across an entire island- they are 
among the most formidable of opponents.  Since they are not 
intelligent and are easily out-witted, the best strategy is often 
to evade them and flee.  However, if forced into battle, closing 
in to engage the serpent directly in combat will improve a 
ship's odds of surviving.

From Beyond the Grave
	Ghosts.  Spirits of the uneasy dead, these bodiless 
creatures compensate for their lack of strength with excellent 
dexterity and the ability to disappear at will.  Although ghosts 
do not inflict much damage with a blow, defeating them will 
require cunning.
	Skeletons.  Perhaps the most common of undead 
creatures, skeletons lack strength and brains, but they are 
dextrous and can take a surprising amount of punishment.  
They often carry some goods.
	Daemons.  Very strong, agile, and smart, daemons have 
repertoires of magic that include summoning other daemons 
and possessing their opponents.  They are extremely hardy 
and difficult to kill even if incapacitated.  Daemons fly and 
can easily manage to cross rivers or shallow waters, although 
they are seldom encountered in mid ocean.
	When daemons possess another creature, they disappear 
into that soul, leaving neither trace nor treasure.

Virtue
After years of meditation and thought, after hundreds of 
quests along the mental, physical, and spiritual path to peace 
and fulfillment, a person might reach near perfection in the 
eight virtues of Avatarhood.  Only while an individual 
continues to strive against the external and internal forces of 
evil, can he or she be said to be on the path of the Avatar.
	The ankh is the symbol of peace and benevolence toward 
all creatures, worn as a sign by those on the lifelong Quest of 
the Avatar.  Ankhs are believed also to enhance courage and 
loyalty to goodness and to help ward off harm for knights 
striving to achieve the eight virtues.
	Honesty is scrupulous respect for truth- the willingness 
never to deceive oneself or another.  Compassion is 
nonjudgmental empathy for one's fellow creatures.  Valor is 
the courage to take actions in support of one's convictions.  
Justice is the devotion to truth, tempered by love. Sacrifice is 
the courage to give of oneself in the name of love.  Honor is 
the courage to stand for the truth, against any odds.  
Spirituality is the concern with one's inner being and how 
one deals with truth, love, and courage.  Humility is 
perceiving one's place in the world, not according to one's 
own accomplishments, but according to the intrinsic value of 
all individuals.
	Each of Britannia's eight leading townes celebrates one 
of the virtues of Avatarhood, and each has raised a shrine to 
that virtue.  The shrines are located in retreats to ensure 
tranquillity in natural settings, so traveling to some shrines 
requires a considerable journey from their townes.
	The only requirement for using a shrine is knowing the 
mantra for that virtue.  A mantra is a sound repeated 
continuously during meditation, helping to clear the mind 
and focus the spirit.  Each virtue has a specific mantra that 
works best for it, and sincere meditation can bring great 
wisdom.  Someone in towne will usually divulge the mantra 
for the towne's shrine.

Magic
No one knows exactly when the powers of magic were 
discovered.  Little by little, stories of impossible coups and 
miraculous recoveries increased in number and detail, until 
finally even the most skeptical people began to give credence 
to some mystic factors.  And only then did the serious 
scholarly search for magical means and lore begin.  Few 
remain who do not accept the reality of magic.
	Yet the knowledge of magic and its use appears to be in 
its infancy.  There are few formal schools in which to learn 
magic.  To be a user of magic, one must travel far and wide to 
learn from various mages who have developed and honed 
special magical abilities.  Even then there is no guarantee the 
mages will impart their knowledge.

The Language of Magic
Some aspects of magical lore have become fairly well known.  
One such is the language of magic.  This is a set of twenty-
four syllables compiled by a great language scholar after 
traveling throughout Britannia for more than seven years.  
These are all the components of any magic spell yet known; 
but they are little help- and extremely dangerous- without 
knowledge of how to combine them into the phrases that 
make meaningful incantations.

Following is a list of these powerful syllables, approximations 
of their meanings, and a guide to their pronunciation.

Syllable        Idea    Sound   Syllable        Idea            Sound
An              negate  ah n    Nox             poison          n ah ks
Bet             small   b eh t  Por             movement        p oar
Corp            death   koar p  Quas            illusion        kw ah ss
Des             down    d eh ss Rel             change          r eh I
Ex              freedom x       Sanct           protection      s aa ng kt
Flam            flame   fl ah m Tym             time            t ih m
Grav            energy  gr ah v Uus             up              oo ss
Hur             wind    h oo r  Vas             great           v ah ss
In              create  ih n    Wis             knowledge       w ee ss
Kal             invoke  k ah I  Xen             creature        z eh n
Lor             light   I oar   Ylem            matter          aye l eh m
Mani            life    mah nee Zu              sleep           z oo

The Mixtures of Magic
Reagents are herbs needed for the preparation of magical 
mixtures.  Most are sold in apothecaries; a few are hard to 
find and require special effort to obtain.  Following is a chart 
of the magical reagents and the general areas of proficiency 
they affect.

Black Pearl				
	Projection
A rare version of the standard white pearl, a black pearl is a 
forceful reagent in the creation of kinesthetic magic, that is, 
projecting objects.

Blood Moss				
	Movement
Fungal growth usually found in deep forests and warm, damp 
areas; especially favored as a reagent for its ability to enhance 
mobility.

Garlic					
	Warding
Ubiquitous and strong-scented reagent, used effectively in 
warding off evil spirits.

Ginseng						Healing
Ancient reagent used extensively in healing.

Mandrake Root					Power
Very rare and usually expensive magical herb growing only 
in swampy areas, mandrake root is said to bring great power 
to magic that uses it.

Nightshade					Poison, 
Illusion
Rare, poisonous plant that appears only when the moons are 
in a certain conjunction.  Those who learn its whereabouts 
and manage to be there in the dead of night when the moons 
are full can pick nightshade without danger and benefit from 
its powerful ability as a reagent to create illusions.

Spider Silk					Binding
The magical product of the garden spider and its relatives has 
no peer in its ability to bind.  As a reagent mixed for magic, 
spider silk magnifies its binding power many times over.

Sulphurous Ash					Energy
Common material left by volcanic action, ash is an excellent 
source of energy in magical mixtures.

The Spells
Spells diverge greatly in terms of difficulty, and, 
correspondingly, in terms of danger to the caster.  After years 
of observation and experimentation, scholars in magic have 
classified spells into eight circles of difficulty.  Thus, mages 
who can command only the simplest spells are considered to 
be of the first circle, and so on.
	Full mages' magical ability is directly related to their 
intelligence.  Bards appear to have half the magical ability of 
full mages and fighters rarely have any.  Casting spells drains 
magical powers, limiting how many spells mages can cast 
before resting.  A spell will drain magical powers in amounts 
proportional to the spell's circle of difficulty.
	On the facing page, a chart classifies the spells by circle, 
with a brief indication of each spell's use, a note on when it 
can be used. and an ingredient list.  Do not take the 
ingredient lists to be recipes, as wrong quantities or careless 
mixing could have terrible results.
	Note that not all spells can be used in all situations.  
Quite a few spells need far too much time or concentration to 
be cast during combat; others feed on the energies present in 
the battle arena.

                        The Spell Book
                            of the
                        Eight Circles

The First Circle
An Nox					Negate Poison
Few deadly problems are as easy to arrest as poison. So 
common is the use of poison that alchemists have been able to 
devise a formula, us the relatively common plants garlic and 
ginseng, that is effective against nearly every form of poison 
in nearly every user.  However, the magic works on 
individuals only; thus, simple as it is, novice mages in a party 
must have magic endurance among them great enough to cast 
An Nox many times as they have afflicted members, or 
someone may be left with life seeping away.  Even then, 
safety is not secured.  Strength already sapped by toxins is not 
regained without peaceful rest or healing magic.

An Zu						Negate Sleep
An Zu, which requires a simple mixture of ginseng and 
garlic, is used awaken sleeping comrades.  An Zu has 
limitations: it works only on members of the caster's party, it 
awakens only one person per cast and it has no lasting 
preventative effect.

Grav Por					Energy Movement
A novice magic user had best count on a good solid weapon 
in battle.  A good spell for novices to practice, not rely on, in 
battle, is Grav Por, which casts a missile of energy at a target 
on the battlefield.  If the caster's mental powers exceed the 
foe's, small damage will be inflicted.
Grav Por requires sulphurous ash for energy and black pearl 
to project it.  This spell has little effect for novices, not 
because of weak ingredients, but because of inexperience.

In Lor						Create Light
This simple spell creates a pool of light.  Although of short 
duration, In Lor creates a brighter light than the best of 
torches.  Note, however, that In Lor cannot be used in place 
of real flame to enhance the mixing of reagents for spells, for 
its properties are quite different.
In Lor's sole ingredient is sulphurous ash powder.  Place that 
powder upon the object intended as the light source, rub it 
rhythmically while chanting "In Lor." Almost instantly, the 
object will blaze with white light.

Mani						Life
Mani is the simplest healing spell.  Mani does not cure 
patients, but it does make them feel better and may take them 
out of immediate danger.  Mani is useful even to higher circle 
magicians, because it is simple enough to cast during combat.
Spider silk and ginseng are the components needed for Mani.  
No special conditions are necessary during mixing or casting.

The Second Circle
An Sanct					Negate Protection
Many evil creatures carry chests full of treasure and useful 
items, often the result of thievery against some other good 
Britannian.  No good person begrudges the vanquisher a 
monster's gold and goods.
But evil creatures often arm their chests with deadly traps.  
Popular chest traps are acid sprays, poison fumes, bombs, and 
gaseous atmospheres.  The first two are designed with intent 
to destroy the individual tampering with the lock.  The last 
two affect the entire area of the chest and injure anyone in 
that area.
An Sanct uses blood moss and sulphurous ash to seep into 
hidden traps and render them impotent.  The spell also 
negates any nonmagical locks in the chest.  The same spell 
may be used to unlock doors locked by mechanical keys.

An Xen Corp					Negate Creature of Death
The powers of evil revel in their ability to command the 
uneasy dead.  Rotted corpses and corrupted spirits, given 
motion and a semblance of life, are set on the mindless 
destruction of everything good.
Such phantoms are not living but are merely animated.  They 
act mindlessly, unaware of their own horrible state.  By 
negating their armour of mindlessness, An Xen Corp causes 
most risen dead to flee in lurching terror.
	An Xen Corp is not a difficult spell, especially for casters 
of good intellect.  Nor is its mixture difficult: ordinary 
amounts of common garlk and sulphurous ash must be mixed 
while pronouncing words of reverence for life and beauty.

In Wis						Create Knowledge
In Wis performs the job of a navigator, determining one's 
precise location in terms of the recently devised concepts of 
latitude and longitude.  Nightshade is its only ingredient, but 
that nightshade must be encased in glass and kept alive with 
dew drops until its use is required.

Kal Xen                                          Summon Creature
Beginning mages often find their responsibility onerous, with 
an entire group of adventurers relying on their meager 
magical skills for protection and assistance in difficult 
situations.  These novice mages may quickly and frequently 
turn to Kal Xen to add to the offensive ranks of their party in 
battle.
Kal Xen summons small nasty creatures such as rats and 
snakes to help in combat.  Nasty or not, these summoned 
beasts are always loyal to the caster, and often direct a foe's 
attention away from members of the mage's party.
	Mix mandrake root with spider silk to ensure the beast's 
loyalty.  The locale where the mandrake root is gathered 
influences what type of creature is summoned.

Rel Hur                                         Change Wind
Those who love the open sea will find frequent use for Rel 
Hur.  This powerful spell can redirect the wind for a time.
To mix Rel Hur, line a board with damp blood moss and set 
the board against a tree or mast.  Study the wind and find the 
exact spot in which to stand so that sulphurous ash thrown 
into the air will be caught by the wind and flung against the 
blood moss.  Complete the spell by blowing in the direction 
the wind should follow.

The Third Circle
In Flam Grav					Create Flame Energy
One of three energy field spells, alike except for the nature of 
the horrors they create, In Flam Grav causes the particular 
spot indicated by the caster to erupt into red hot flames.  Any 
creature on that spot or that steps into that spot is seared by a 
wall of flame.  Be careful not to direct this spell too close to 
friends or they shall suffer the same as foes.
Sulphurous ash and black pearl project the burning fire to the 
chosen spot; spider silk holds it there a short while.  The mix 
works best when blended over a flame.

In Nox Grav					Create Poison Energy
Another of the three energy field spells, In Nox Grav causes a 
cloud of nauseating poison to occur in the location indicated.  
Any creatures entering the cloud suffer some degree of 
poisoning.  Like In Flam Grav, this spell can be just as 
effective in harming friends as enemies, so use care.
That rare but deadly poison, nightshade, is required for In 
Nox Grav.  Add to the nightshade spider silk to shape the 
cloud, and a black pearl to direct its placement.

In Por						Create Movement
In Por teleports an entire party a fair distance in any specified 
direction.  However, incanting this spell during the haste of 
battle will diminish its effects.  It will only remove the caster, 
and then only to another place on the field of battle.
	In Por will not transport a party if there is no clear, 
grassy spot to which the party can be moved.  Nor will In Por 
work in dungeons or in townes, as its energies require a fair 
bit of open space to operate.
	The dust for In Por consists of spider silk and fresh 
young blood moss.  The caster must close his eyes and 
conjure a vision of the current position after the party has left.  
In a wink, the party will be elsewhere and the vision, reality.

In Zu Grav					Create Sleep Energy
Least damaging of the three energy field spells, In Zu Grav is 
often the most effective.  The spell cloaks a foe in a purple 
haze that puts it instantly to sleep, taking it out of the fight, 
rendering it helpless.
	Like the other two similar spells.  In Zu Grav can affect 
friends as easily as enemies.  While sleep will not directly 
harm friends, falling asleep on the field of battle can be 
deadly.
	In Zu Grav is easily mixed of common ginseng, spider 
silk, and black pearl.  For best results, add the air of many 
yawns and sand from sleepy eyes.

Vas Flam                                        Great Flame
Vas Flam effectively gathers a great ball of flame, which may 
then be hurled at a foe.  A simple spell, the great advantage of 
Vas Flam is that, aimed accurately, it will surely hit its mark 
and, just as surely, inflict damage.
	Combine common sulphurous ash and a single black 
pearl over a hot flame.  When the ash has adhered well to the 
pearl, remove it and store it until needed.  Cast the talisman 
at a foe while uttering "Vas Flam" and a great flaming ball 
will smite him.

Vas Lor                                         Great Light
Vas Lor conjures a great light.  This light is equivalent to In 
Lor's in quality and range, but Vas Lor lasts much longer 
than the beginner's spell.  Its endurance comes from rare 
mandrake root.  Mix the prepared root with sulphurous ash 
and proceed as if making In Lor.

The Fourth Circle
An Grav                                         Negate Energy
Adventuring parties are sometimes prevented from pursuing 
their objective by obstructing or noxious fields.  An Grav 
removes the obstructing field by negating the field's energy.
	Ash countermines the field's energy; a black pearl thrusts 
the negating energy in the direction indicated by the spell 
caster.  The obstructing field is instantly dispersed.

Des Por                                         Downward Movement
Uus Por                                         Upward Movement
Magic users often travel with courageous groups, and 
courageous group often find themselves in danger.  When 
problems occur within dungeon, it is sometimes helpful to use 
Des Por and its complement Uus Por for moving among 
floors.  Only effective when going from empty corridor to 
empty corridor, Des Por transports an entire group to the 
exact same location one floor lower.  Uus Por works in 
reverse, and transports upward.  Unfortunately, these spells 
take too long to intone during the heat of battle.
	Blood moss provides the motion and spider silk keeps the 
party together during the transport.

In Sanct					Create Protection
Sometimes young questers join in battles beyond their might.  
In Sanct helps balance the fight by creating a protective 
shield around each party member.
	In Sanct works only during combat and does not last 
long, so knights should be sure to hit hard and fast while the 
iron is doubled.
	In Sanct is most effective when sulphurous ash, fast-
working ginseng, and reeking garlic are mixed by the mage 
and the group's strongest fighter, simultaneously.

In Sanct Grav					Create Protective Energy
In Sanct Grav's protective energy provides a strong defense.  
Its shimmering blueness cannot be entered or passed through.  
An excellent recourse when a few moments of safety are 
required, In Sanct Grav is well used to block dungeon 
corridors fully.
	Mandrake root is necessary for In Sanct Grav; choose 
older, tougher specimens for this concoction.  Add spider silk 
to make it impenetrable and pearl for placement.

Wis Quas                                        Knowledge of Illusion
Wis Quas strips illusion from creatures hidden by the cloak of 
invisibility, instantly revealing their positions.
	Nightshade cut many times to form a paperlike sheet, 
then carved into lace, is secured by spider silk.  It is glazed, 
dried in the sun, and then crystallized into a shiny powder 
that must be tossed in the sky over the field of battle as the 
spell is cast.

The Fifth Circle
An Ex Por                                       Negate Freedom of Movement
The magical locking of doors works in nearly every situation.  
Even normal locks can be transformed to magical locks by 
means of this spell.  Thus the very creature who initially 
locked a door with its own key may be forbidden access.
	Mix ash and moss, gathered from darkest glens under 
heavy clouds, into a strong garlic paste.  While mixing, sing a 
melody that no other creature has ever heard.  For greatest 
security, the melody should be different each mixing-, so each 
magical lock will require a subtly different magical key, and 
anyone trying to break the magical lock will not be able to use 
any previously discovered keys.

In Bet Xen                                      Create Small Creature
This combat spell creates a powerful ally by calling up four 
swarms of small but deadly insects.  All four swarms are 
generated in the same location.  However, each can be 
commanded to move independently and on its own turn.  
Quartets of insect swarms generated by In Bet Xen have been 
known to surround and suffocate an enemy by their very 
number,
	The powder for In Bet Xen consists of sulphurous ash to 
give life energy, blood moss to set them swarming, and spider 
silk to bind the swarm in obedience.  For deadliest results, 
blend with stagnant water from the dankest swamp.

In Ex Por                                       Create Freedom of Movement
This powerful spell can open magical locks.  The power of In 
Ex Por is that it first analyzes the lock to be broken and then 
actually produces t precise tool or magical potion that will 
break the lock.
The success of this spell comes from combining ash and moss 
in isolation, in complete darkness.

In Zu                                           Create Sleep
The first mass effect spell the developing magician learns, In 
Zu causes the scent of poppies to emanate from the caster in 
an ever-widening wedge, dropping into a sound sleep all 
those touched by it.  Only the toughest minds and wills may 
deny it.
	Nightshade, gathered when high tide coincides with a 
moonless midnight, must be mixed with ocean ginseng and 
spider silk.  Moisten with brine and add sand to mix 
thoroughly.  Lay to dry in bright moonlight.  Note that this 
spell is just as effective on friend as foe; aim carefully.

Rel Tym                                         Change Time
Rel Tym doubles a party's speed, anytime, anywhere.  It is 
especially effective in battle, when a party's members can 
return two blows for each of the enemies' blows.  It is also 
effective in surveillance, when being caught could be 
disastrous.
	Sulphurous ash provides energy, blood moss creates 
movement, and mandrake root provides the magical power 
required for this incantation.


Vas Mani                                        Great Life
Whole health restored; full vitality given: such is the nature 
of Vas Mani.  A miraculous spell requiring concentration and 
vast knowledge of anatomy, Vas Mani is reserved for 
experienced mages.
	Vas Mani fully restores patients from combat wounds.  
While it provides neither antidote to poison nor cure for 
disease, Vas Mani does heal all damage wrought by these 
ravagers, ensuring survival until a cure can be found.
	The difficulty in preparing Vas Mani is in locating the 
mandrake root-, otherwise the preparation is straightforward: 
mix the mandrake root with ginseng and spider silk.
	To cast Vas Mani successfully, the caster must 
concentrate totally on the subject to be healed.  When the 
concentration is full, one can actually see wounds heal.  
Because the healing process can take several hours, Vas Mani 
cannot be used during combat.

The Sixth Circle
An Xen Ex                                       Negate a Creature's Freedom
A most effective tactic to use against enemies is to charm 
members of their party to work against them.  However, this 
spell is most difficult to apply where it could be of the most 
help, against the most diabolical of foes, those of superior 
intelligence.
	Control of a charmed individual is limited to fighting and 
moving; it does not extend to use of magic or special forms of 
attack.  This spell can also be used to bring back party 
members after they have been charmed by a foe.
	An Xen Ex requires a careful mixture of nightshade, to 
poison the mind; a black pearl, for projection; and spider silk, 
to bind loyalty.

In An                                           Create Negation
In An creates an air of magical negation.  Spells fizzle when 
In An is in effect and neither side in combat can use magic 
for several rounds.
	First, mandrake root must be gathered; the root must be 
rubbed wit garlic and wrapped in a damp, black cloth for 
several hours.  At midnight it must be pulverized and mixed 
with sulphurous ash.  The mixture must be dried on a 
parchment and the parchment then folded into a tricorn.  I 
casting the spell, a hole must be cut in the tricorn and the 
mixture dispensed from this in a wide arc.

In Vas Por Ylem                           Create a Great Movement of Matter
In Vas Por Ylem is a terrifying spell that can generate a 
massive earthquake.  While it reaches every enemy in combat, 
even if lurking in distant, corners or behind mountains, the 
magical earthquake leaves allies unshaken and unharmed.
	Seek mandrake root that has grown unobstructed, so that 
its form is strong yet fibrous.  Grind it with sulphurous ash 
and blood moss until no ingredient can be distinguished from 
another.

Quas An Wis                                     Illusion of Negated Knowledge
Quas An Wis turns a foe's orderly, well planned attack into 
bedlam.  Confusion reigns and creatures strike out at 
whomever is nearest, regardless of loyalty.  Extremely 
effective against the likes of rats and orcs, Quas An Wis loses 
much of its impact against more intelligent monsters, which 
are often capable of recognizing and resisting it.
	A mix of rare mandrake root and nightshade, the cloud 
of Quas An Wis works only for experienced mages.

Wis An Ylem                                     Knowledge of Negated Matter
Adept magicians are relied upon, not only to aid in battle and 
to repair wounds, but to guide their party wisely.  Wis An 
Ylem provides the necessary insight by making the hidden, 
apparent.  For an instant, the caster may see through the 
densest forest, the tallest mountain, the most solid rock.  No 
wall can be too thick, no door too heavy, and no night too 
dark.
	Requiring intensity of concentration, Wis An Ylem 
cannot be maintained for more than a flash of time.  Thick, 
mature mandrake root must be combined with sulphurous ash 
in clear rain water.  Boil the mixture until it becomes steam 
and capture the steam in a small glass box.  Open the box as 
the spell is uttered.

The Seventh Circle
In Nox Hur                                      Create a Poison Wind
A cone of poisonous wind emanates from the hands of an 
agile wizard when In Nox Hur is cast, widening as it moves 
forward and sickening at in its path- friend or foe.  Quite 
effective against many kinds of creature In Nox Hur is 
dangerous to use since the slightest error can destroy 
comrades as well as foes.  Only the most dextrous should 
attempt it.
	Nightshade is required, in great quantity, along with 
blood moss, thoroughly crushed, and sulphurous ash, as dry 
as possible.

In Quas Corp                                    Create an Illusion of Death
Illusion is a dangerous tool and In Quas Corp creates a 
powerful illusion Suddenly, in the eyes of all creatures not 
intelligent enough to recognize the illusion, each party 
member may be made to appear as a twelve-foot giant, with a 
sword like a guillotine and a staff like a tree trunk.  Fear 
strikes foes to the cores of their beings.  They shriek and flee.
	In Quas Corp is expensive.  The dust that must fill the 
atmosphere a the spell is cast contains both powerful 
mandrake root and hallucinogenic nightshade.  Simple garlic 
adds to the distastefulness of the experience for the foe.

In Quas Wis                                  Create an Illusion for Knowledge
Travelers in Britannia tell of magical gems that transport the 
vision of one gazing into their depths to a viewpoint 
thousands of feet above the land, like that of an eagle 
suspended in flight.  It is illusion and reality, The change of 
viewpoint is illusion, but the knowledge provided is real 
Powerful mages can replicate these miraculous effects 
through magic.
	In Quas Wis requires only two ingredients to create its 
illusion.  Only the most powerful mandrake root will work for 
this spell; and only the most convoluted stems of nightshade.  
Mix the two in dark of night with seven drops of ice cold 
spring water.  Let the moisture evaporate. then place the 
shimmering powder in a cloth sack.
	When intoning In Quas Wis, cast the powder high to 
view the world about as if from the air.  If cast within a 
towne, building, or dungeon, all the detail of that level will be 
revealed.

In Quas Xen                                 Create an Illusionary Creature
Another powerful combat spell is In Quas Xen.  By means of 
illusion, this spell duplicates friend or foe, in every detail.  
Although the new creature is an illusion, it fights, bleeds, 
cares, exactly as its original.
When a friend is cloned, the original and duplicate are still 
joined.  Injury to each is felt by the other, death to one 
destroys the other.  Yet the two are physically separate; they 
have independent turns in battle and may work together to 
vanquish a foe.
	When a hostile creature is duplicated, no connection 
between copy and original seems to remain.  Pain to a 
monster's clone is not felt by the monster; and death of the 
creature does not remove the clone.
The power of mandrake root is essential to this spell; as are 
the illusionary properties of nightshade.  To mature root add 
spider silk to bind and ginseng to heal; mix with the living 
energy of sulphurous ash and add blood moss for animation.
	When casting the spell, fling the glittering sand that 
results into the air.  The wind will catch the granules, and 
where the first one touches earth, there shall the clone arise.

Sanct Lor                                   Protect from Light
Sanct Lor affects the path of light, bending it around the 
caster, so it may continue on.  The result is the illusion that 
the caster is not there.
	Mix mandrake root and nightshade picked in absolute 
darkness with blood moss to bend the light.  It is essential 
that, while intoning this spell, none see any indication of its 
casting.  Speak without moving lips.

Xen Corp                                    Creature Death
Regardless of the strength, size, or endurance of a foe, Xen 
Corp will overcome it.  Only a creature with intelligence 
capable of greater concentration than that used in the casting, 
and capable of recognizing the intent before the spell is 
completed, has a chance of escaping death when assailed by 
Xen Corp.
	Mix nightshade that has never seen light with the 
blackest pearl.  Pour the powder into a small lead capsule and 
seal with black wax.  While intoning the spell, hurl the 
capsule at the foe selected for destruction.

The Eighth Circle
An Tym                                      Negate Time
Perhaps the most difficult of spells, An Tym appears to stop 
time itself.  For eons, scholars of thaumaturgy have tried to 
learn the secret of controlling the universe, and the more they 
discovered, the more convinced they became that they could 
never control this power even if they understood it.  It is a 
tribute to the brilliance and creativity of Britannian minds 
that experts, undaunted by their failures, simply turned the 
problem around and found a way to achieve every advantage 
of briefly controlling time without actually controlling it at 
all.
	Those capable of this spell will witness their foes 
paralyzed in midmotion.  After a few moments, all returns to 
normal, just as though time has actually stopped and started 
up again.  However, the caster's party re-
	mains active throughout the spell.
	An Tym requires a mixture of mandrake root, well 
preserved blood moss, and a garlic clove.

In Flam Hur                                 Create A Flame Wind
In Flam Hur causes the wind itself to catch fire and devastate 
all in its path.  Those who intone this spell can direct the 
flaming wind in a deadly, spreading wedge.  All creatures in 
the path of this wedge are severely burned, few ever survive.  
Careless misdirection of In Flam Hur over one's own 
companions may result in their deaths as well.
	Sulphurous ash, blood moss, and mandrake root combine 
best for this spell in an iron cauldron over great heat.

In Mani Corp                                Create Life from Death
There are many rewards for hard work and concentrated 
practice.  For practiced wizards, having attained the eighth 
circle, there is the reward of being able to reverse death itself.  
Resurrection requires such total concentration and peace of 
mind that it should never be attempted on the harried field of 
battle.
	To mix, place a mandrake root in a sieve in a fresh water 
spring on a sunlit day.  One by one, add garlic, to keep away 
ills and evil, spider silk for binding the life forces together, 
ginseng for healing, sulphurous ash for the spark of life, and 
blood moss to animate the spirit.
	Remove the sieve from the spring and let the mixture 
dry.  A small crystal will form from the drying mass.  To 
revive a companion, place the crystal on the friend's forehead 
and intone In Mani Corp. The resurrected person will be 
weak and in need of further assistance.

In Vas Grav Corp                            Create a Great Energy of Death
In Vas Grav Corp is the most powerful instrument of death 
yet devised.  This spell lays waste to every living creature in 
its path unless the creature be exempt from the natural laws 
of this world or be of strong enough intellect to resist the 
spell.
	Mandrake root must be gathered on a dark night during a 
lightning storm.  It must be marinated in shme from stagnant 
mosquito fens and wrapped in nightshade, which must have 
been picked at midnight in total darkness.  This package 
should be rolled in sulphurous ash and left on a grave 
overnight.  If it is not discovered, it is ready to be dried into 
stringy dreadlocks of death.

Kal Xen Corp                                Call a Creature of Death
Kal Xen Corp resembles Kal Xen, but its summons has far 
greater complexity and power.  Kal Xen Corp calls forth a 
daemon.  But only an experienced wizard is able to devote the 
concentration needed to bind the daemon's allegiance and 
prevent it from turning on his party.  Then, although the 
daemon cannot use its own powers of possession, it can hurl 
great balls of fire across long distances to smite foes.
	Mandrake root, gathered as near as possible to entrances 
to dungeons, pits, and other vile holes, is the base of this 
spell.  Add garlic, blood moss, and the strongest spider silk.  
Meld the lot together letting the moisture of the root act as a 
binding.  Now shape the mixture into the form of the winged 
daemon.  Raise the icon to the sky, intone this spell, and hear 
it calling its own.

Vas Rel Por                                 Gate Travel
A moongate traveler cannot rely on magic alone.  The 
knowledge of the influence of the moon's phases is also 
required.  Take a black pearl and shine it well.  Bury the pearl 
in a clean piece of mandrake root.  Sprinkle the whole with 
sulphurous ash and expose the conglomeration to the moons 
during one night.  In morning it will be a fine silver powder.
	To travel, cast the powder in the direction of the gate to 
be reached while speaking the name of that gate's town 
followed by "Vas Rel Por." Immediately drop to the ground 
and meditate on the proper phases of the moon for that gate.  
Instantly, the party will be there.


Editor's Note
Between the time this volume originally went to press and the 
time galleys arrived for final alterations, Lord British was lost 
while on an expedition to explore the newly discovered 
underworld.  Days before we were to print, Lord Blackthorn 
declared martial law to deal with the general unrest in the 
wake of British's disappearance. The Ethics section of this 
book has be-en added to reflect the new measures imposed by 
Blackthorn.

Ethics
The Ethics of Britannia, or the accepted measure of proper 
behavior, were long based on the Way of the Avatar.  As time 
progressed, the lessons of this historic tale came to be 
interpreted in many ways.  In fact, many people interpreted 
the Way of the Avatar in ways that wouldn't require them to 
strive to uphold these virtues.
Now, Lord Blackthorn, acting king of all Britannia, has 
enacted a Code of Virtue that leaves no room for 
misinterpretation.

1.	Thou shalt not lie, or thou shalt lose thy tongue.
2.	Thou shalt help those in need, or thou shalt suffer the 
        same need.
3.	Thou shalt fight to the death if challenged, or thou shalt 
        be banished as a coward '
4.	Thou shalt confess to thy crime and suffer its just 
        punishment, or thou shalt be put to death.
5.	Thou shalt donate half of thy income to charity, or thou 
        shalt have no income.
6.	If thou dost lose thine own honor, thou shalt take thine 
        own life.
7.	Thou shalt enforce the laws of virtue, or thou shalt die as 
        a heretic.
8.	Thou shalt humble thyself to thy superiors, or thou shalt 
        suffer their wrath.

27th day of the 11th month of 
the year 137

Herein is detailed the odyssey of his Majesty 
Lord British as recorded by Remoh, scribe 
to the court of Lord British. With us on this 
journey into the uncharted Underworld 
venture the knights Arionis, Meridin, 
Geraci, Shaana, Noin, and Roin.

Day 1

At dawn, we set off on our skiff down the River Maelstrom, 
east of Spiritwood. Before the falls, we pause to remember 
the brave men who discovered this entrance to the 
Underworld. Then we cast off and repeat their plunge into the 
lightless underground waterway. We land our boat on the 
western shore of a great lake. The cavern's low ceiling hangs 
close over us and the humidity is oppressive.

Arionis and Geraci erect a wooden sign commemorating our 
expedition. The rest of us repair the damage to our skiff 
inflicted by the subterranean rapids that carried us here.

We embark again, following a navigable stream south. After 
a short distance, a tributary branches off to the east, but we 
continue south. The cavern walls now tower above us, dimly 
reflecting our torchlight.

The current grows stronger and the crashing sound of 
tortured water steadily increases. Abruptly, the river turns a 
sharp bend. The roar grows painfully loud as our skiff 
careens down a great fall. A storage cask breaks loose and 
knocks Meridin our of the boat during our fall. The skiff 
lands flooded, bur miraculously upright. We drag the 
unconscious Meridin back into the boat and retrieve the cask. 
He revives as we row west, past a southern tributary.

The river slows as we arrive at another fork. We continue 
north, hugging the water-hewn stone wall on our right. As the 
river swings back to the southwest, we hear the sound of 
approaching waterfalls. Quickly we land the boat on the 
southern shore. Geraci sets off to explore a promising 
passage through the rocks to the southeast. On returning, she 
reports that the natural fissure slopes downward steeply, but 
rejoins the river beyond the treacherous falls. We portage 
our skiff around the falls with little difficulty and are once 
again on our way. While the day wanes thousands of feet 
above us, the river empties into a calm lake, stretching out 
beyond our sight into the murky gloom. We row south by 
southeast, following the shore.

A muffled scream, a heavy splash are our first omens of 
danger. We all stare at the stern where, moments before, the 
raven haired knight Shaana sat. Meridin quickly intones two 
words of magic, and the lake around us explodes in light, 
blinding us momentarily. We see a hideous ebony creature, 
twice as large as our skiff with Shaana clutched in one of its 
slimy tentacles. Already dozens of yards away, it is retreating 
ten paces further with every heartbeat.

Lord British strides to the stern and stretches his arms toward 
the receding monstrosity. In a voice as clear as crystal, in a 
tone as urgent as the wind, he speaks seven words. We do not 
comprehend their meaning, but we witness their impact. The 
squid creature pulls up suddenly. A wrenching noise tears 
through the dank air. A large wave passes under our boat. 
The squid creature has been vanquished. The light from 
Meridin's spell fades, and new torches are lit to replace those 
dropped in panic. Shaana, dragged from the water, now 
sleeps at her place upon the boat's stern. Our king rests also, 
deep in the meditation of the virtues. We row on.

Eventually, at the southern shore of the lake, we follow the 
westernmost of two identical-looking streams. We explore 
several land passages along the way, but they all prove to be 
dead ends. The river turn north, flows on a while, and then 
perversely turns south. Our firs day's journey ends at this 
juncture.


Day 2

We awaken to a morning as dark as the blackest of nights. 
Our campfire is a damp mound of cold ashes. The 
underground river has risen in the night, soaking the meager 
supply of dry wood we brought with us.

Setting out upon the waters again, we row south. Scarcely an 
hour passes before we come upon another waterfall, one with 
no opportunities for portaging around. From the beach, 
however, we can see the river resuming only a few yards 
beyond the falls. With few options, we brace ourselves and 
steer over the falls. As soon as we are righted, though, the 
coursing water turns abruptly and we plunge down another 
fall. Shaken and bruised, the group has barely enough time to 
secure a firm grip on the boat before we plunge down a third 
cascade.

After a brief respite, we pass over a fourth, though smaller 
falls. Finally, we pass into a small, tranquil lake. We land on 
the south shore and examine the area. Though a large fissure 
in the cliff walls provides a land exit to the south, no 
navigable waterway leaves the cavern. There is no choice: we 
shoulder our remaining provisions and continue on foot 
through the fissure. The rough ride over the falls has 
eliminated another option: if we ever return to Britannia, it 
will not be by retracing our steps.

The path leaving the cavern is at first swampy and tedious to 
walk upon, but the way becomes easier as we leave the lake 
behind. Soon the path curves north again and we come upon 
a great cavern with an uneven rock ceiling many stories high. 
We are now walking on yellow grass-like growth.

A movement by his feet causes Arionis to halt. Before we can 
draw our weapons, a great leathery tentacle as thick as a 
man's leg coils around Arionis then starts dragging him into 
its underground lair. Noin drives his deadly main gauche into 
the tentacle. Thick green fluid streams from the severed 
tentacle as it falls away. As Arionis stumbles to his feet, he 
quickly shouts a warning. Noin turns to sever a second 
tentacle just before it ensnares him. Movement in the grass 
from which we have just come indicates more tentacled 
monstrosities approaching. We flee together to the north side 
of the cavern, slipping between rocks into a passage leading 
away to the east. Before long the passage turns and we head 
south again.

At the end of the passage, we find ourselves in a massive 
cavern. The walls and ceiling extend beyond the glow of our 
torches. We wait in vain for our echoes to return. It is 
difficult to fathom a cavern so large it stifles echoes. We turn 
to the right, hugging the southern wall. The stench of a 
stagnant river fills the air. As we walk, the mud gives way to 
sand. When we have left the river miles behind us, we 
encamp.

Day 3

A shriek of pain awakens us after only a few hours of sleep. 
Meridin utters an oath followed by two eerie sounds, and a 
grisly scene is revealed. The knight Geraci is standing 
unsteadily, slicing her dagger at six great worm that swarm 
around her, rearing up to strike, while deftly evading her 
dagger. Her left arm is held against her chest, in an attempt 
to staunch the flow of blood from a gaping wound.

Lord British raises his staff and utters an incantation. A deep 
chill descends momentarily, then the six worms forget their 
prey and assault each other with unreasoned fury. Meridin 
magically draws out the worms' poisonous venom. We 
quickly bind Geraci's arm, gather our gear, and resume our 
journey eastward along the southern wall. Only two worms 
remain writhing in combat as we depart.

After the wall finally curves to the north, we take a passage 
out of the cavern to the northeast. The trail is rocky, and 
wide enough for three to walk abreast. The twins, Noin and 
Roin, bringing up the rear, are the first to notice the large, 
winged creature with matted, brown fur and sharp, 
unsheathed talons. When we stop to look, however, it flies off. 
Half an hour later, we notice two of these creatures, but both 
fly off again as we turn. An hour later, three of these ugly 
creatures approach, flying closer than the previous forays 
dared, before veering off. We quicken our pace.

The passage empties into a large grassy area with a high, 
earthen ceiling. As we stop to rest, a deafening crescendo of 
screeches heralds the invasion of a dozen winged monsters. 
The avian terrors attack in force. Armour and skin is ripped 
from our backs. Our swords swing, our daggers fly, but to no 
avail. Only two winged monsters are wounded then finished. 
The remaining ten circle us furiously as Lord British shouts 
ou words of mystic command. Four more attackers are 
destroyed, but many more of our party have fallen.

As I fight, I see Meridin from the corner of my eye. He crawls 
out of the fray and raises his arms. Before he falls, he gasps 
four words. A great flame breaks out between his outstretched 
arms and surges forward. One by on, the last of the 
nightmarish creatures is consumed with flame. The largest 
bat spirals to the ground. Its burning carcass crashes next to 
Meridin's corpse - a memorial fire to our great archmage.

Day 4

Today, the three of us remaining buried the valiant knights 
Arionis, Meridin, Geraci, Noin, and Roin, here upon the 
underground battlefield where they fell. Tomorrow we seek 
our way back to our own world; our disastrous quest here is 
finished.

Day 5

The Wraiths came this morning. There were three of them. 
They walked through the stone. Their blackness was deeper 
than the shadows from which the emerged. Advancing 
towards Lord British, they ignored Shaana and myself. Lord 
British held their gazes, murmuring words of life, healing and 
protection. Still they advanced. One raised its hand, pointing 
at our lord. Then a silver bolt struck our immortal king and 
he fell to the stony earth.

Shaana was frozen, transfixed. I stumbled forward, but when I 
touched that cloak, I shrank back. Foreboding washed over 
me. They took our lord with them. I was powerless to stop 
them. I am afraid we all are.


                                Ultima V
                          Player Reference Card

Movement
Except in dungeons or while engaged in combat, your party is 
represented by a single figure. During combat, each party 
member is shown and allowed to act independently. The 
north, south, east, and west keys will move your party or 
party member in the designated direction. The keypad is also 
used to indicate direction when aiming weapons and casting 
spells.
	When in dungeons, pressing [ENTER] or [PERIOD] keys 
will turn you around.
	The diagonal keys are used exclusively for aiming 
weapons or casting spells in combat. Movement is not 
allowed using the diagonal keys.

Menus
In a game menu, use the directional keys to move the cursor 
bar and highlight your choice. When you are satisfied with 
your selection, press the [SPACE BAR] or the [ENTER] key. 
To leave a menu without making a choice, press the 
[ESCAPE] key. If you are selecting a member of the party 
from the party roster, you ma alternatively indicate your 
choice by typing in the number of the player's position in the 
roster

An arrow symbol just below a menu indicates that the list 
extends to include more items in one or both directions

Commands
Following is a list of commands that can be executed by 
pressing the designated key.

	A	Attack - Attempt to engage a person or creature in 
combat. Must be followed by a direction. In combat, 
you can aim weapons in any direction, at any target 
within the weapon's range by using the number 
keypad and moving the crosshair on top of the 
target. Press the A key again or the [SPACE BAR] to 
fire.

	B	Board - Board a frigate, skiff, or other conveyance, 
or mount a horse. If you board a ship from a skiff, 
the skiff will be stowed and kept ready for later use

	C	Cast - Cast a spell. Must be followed by the first 
letters of the spell's syllables. Only works when the 
proper reagents have already been mixed and the 
spellcaster has enough Magic Points remaining. 
Some spells require additional information (direction 
of target)

	E	Enter - Enter townes, castles, and other structures. 
Party members must be standing directly on structure 
to enter.

	F	Fire - Fire cannons. Must be followed by a direction. 
Ship cannons may only fire when the ship's 
broadsides are facing the target.

	G	Get - Take possession of gold, food, and other items. 
Must be followed by a direction.

	H	Hole Up - In dungeons and wilderness, hole up and 
camp once a day to rest, heal wounds, and recover 
magical strength. In cities, hole up in an unoccupied 
bed to quickly pass time. On the sea, hole up to make 
minor repairs to your ship.

	I	Ignite a torch - Light a torch, if you have one, to see 
at night or in dungeons.

	J	Jimmy lock - Unlock most doors and safely open 
chests with a skeleton key. Keys are re-usable, but 
often break if the person jimmying is not nimble 
enough.

	K	Klimb - Climb up or down ladders in buildings and 
dungeons, down steel grates, or over small rockpiles, 
fences, and other objects.

	L	Look - Identify any object or terrain feature or read 
signs one step away. Must be followed by a direction. 
May allow further interaction with some objects, 
such as wells and fountains.

	M	Mix - Prepare spell reagents for later use. Enter the 
first letters of the spell's syllables, then select the 
appropriate reagents from the menu. Press M again 
to mix.

	N	New Order - Exchanges the position of any two 
party members, except the leader. Select the two 
members to be exchanged from the roster menu with 
the cursor bar or by pressing the number key 
representing the players' positions within the party.

	O	Open - Opens an unlocked door or chest. Opening a 
locked chest will set off a trap is the chest has one.

	P	Push - Allows small objects, like tables and chairs, 
to be moved. May be used to block doors.

	Q	Quit and Save - Save the current game status. If you 
do not use this command to end a playing session, 
any progress made since the last save will be lost.

	R	Ready - Equip a party member with personal items 
from the party's stores. Use the direction keys and 
[SPACE BAR] or [ENTER] key to select or de-select 
and item in the menu bar. Press [ESCAPE] when 
finished. (See Note below Z-Stats command)

	S	Search - Search the location or object in the 
direction indicated. Searching may detect traps on 
chests, concealed doors, dungeon floor traps, or 
reveal hidden items. Use the south direction key (2), 
to search the immediate area in dungeon halls.

	T	Talk - Allows you to converse with merchants or 
townfolk in the direction indicated. Conversation is 
possible over counters, tables, fences, and through 
windows and doors with windows.

	U	Use - Use a potion, scroll, or other special item 
found during the game. (See Note below Z-Stats 
command.)

	V	View - Reveals a bird's-eye view of the surrounding 
countryside, city, or dungeon floor currently 
occupied. View requires a special item.

	X	X-it - Exit or dismount current form of 
transportation, leaving it behind while continuing on 
foot. Horses not left by a hitching post may wander 
off. Exiting from a ship is possible only if there is a 
skiff available or if the ship is next to land.

	Y	Yell - On a ship, Yell will hoist or furl sails. In other 
situations, Yell will allow you to enter up to two 
lines of text to be spoken loudly.

	Z	Z-Stats - Displays the status and attributes of your 
party members, including several screens of 
information such as supplies, weapons, and spells. 
Use the East and West directional keys to change 
pages. Use the North and South directional keys to 
scroll up and down long lists. Pressing the 
[ESCAPE] key or the [SPACE BAR] will exit the Z-
stat screens.

Note: Extra keys available for Z-Stats, Ready, and Use 
commands:
Home: move to beginning of list.                End: move to end of list.
Page Up: scroll a page up                       Page Down: scroll a page down

1-6, 0
Designate/Clear Active Player
Several commands request one party member be selected to 
perform the action requested. When this is required, an 
illuminated cursor bar will appear over the names of your 
party members. Use the directional keys to highlight the 
name of the character you wish to designate and press 
[ENTER], or abort the command by pressing [ESCAPE].

Instead of selecting a party member to perform a command 
each time you invoke it, you may set any living party member 
as the "active player". The "active player" will be the default 
player for those commands which require a single party 
member for execution (i.e., jimmy, get, search, etc.) This 
player will remain your active player until you select another 
party member or disable this feature by pressing 0. This 
player will not server as the default during combat. You may 
assign a party member to be the active player during combat 
if you so choose. To assign a player as the active player, press 
the number key from 1 to 6 representing that player's position 
in the party roster.

[SPACE BAR]
Pass - Pass a turn, allowing time in the game to proceed. Also 
aborts any command requiring a directional key.

[ESCAPE]
Aborts or exits commands which use scrolling menus. 
[Escape] speeds exit from combat scenes after all foes have 
been overcome, and allows you to abandon any charmed 
creatures in combat and dungeon rooms.

Ctrl-S
Toggle Sound - Turns sound effects on or off

Ctrl-B
Toggle Buffer - Turns keyboard buffer on or off.

Ultima 5 Walkthrough


General Tips

  SAVE NOW, SAVE OFTEN. If you want to back up a 
certain save, just copy out the SAVED.GAM file in the 
Ultima 5 directory and rename it. 
  Make sure that you have some Cure Poison potions or 
spells (An Nox) prepared at all times. If you get 
poisoned, every step you take will do a point of damage 
to a poisoned character.
  Be careful when fighting rats and snakes because they 
can poison you (that's why its a good idea to get ranged 
weapons as soon as possible). 
  Get magic axes as soon as you can. Combat becomes 
much more enjoyable when you have this weapon.
  The healer in Minoc is free. Use this to your advantage 
and do some experience gathering in that area.
  Ultima 5 is not very strict about the 8 Virtues. Running 
from combat and some minor theft can be overlooked. If 
you ever want to see how your Karma is doing, hit 
CTRL-K.
  The dungeon Covetous is one of the number one places to 
get gold and experience.
  You can designate a character in the party as the active 
player by hitting their number (1-6) during combat. This 
is best used when you want a certain party member to 
gain experience.
  If you see one of the following messages when you walk 
into a city, leave. These messages mean a Shadowlord is 
present, and they will tear you up.
  An air of falsehood doth surround thee.
  An air of cowardice doth surround thee.
  An air of hatred doth surround thee.
  When you are ready to go up a level, an apparition of an 
old man will appear when you sleep. He will give you a 
message that lets you know how your Karma is doing. 
Those messages are as follows (top is worst, bottom is 
best):
  Thou hast strayed far from the path of the 
Avatar. Seek now to renew a life of Virtue, lest 
thy soul pass finally beyond my reach!
  Thy soul seeks direction from thy heart, 
misguided one. Accept now this new chance to 
prove thy worth, ere thou loseth the Way 
forever!
  It is within thee to attain great power, O seeker. 
Search always for new ways of good, and arm 
thyself well for the trial that lie ahead!
  Thou showest well the wisdom of an Avatar, but 
not yet hast thou achieved the potential. Stasy on 
the path and thy soul shall flourish.
  Well armed art thou to fight Death's embrace, O 
enlightened one! Return once more to the world 
for thy Destiny awaits thee!
  Look for secret doors by looking at the walls. You will 
see a small dash in the wall, and that is the spot to 
Search.



Let's Win the Game

Here is the walkthrough for Ultima 5. It covers all the things 
you will need to do to win the game. 

When you start the game, you will be in the chair in the 
middle of Iolo's hut, and Shamino has been severely  
wounded. You must rest to heal him as soon as possible. 

Iolos's Hut
  Get torches
  Leave hut, and walk NE (do not leave the area) and find 
the shed. Jimmy the lock and search the barrel and get 
the potion you find.
 
 Forest
  Go East and camp out at the sign for 8 hours (to heal 
Shamino)
  Go to Lord British's castle
  Climb the ladder in the NW tower. Keep climbing until 
you are on the top of the castle (you will see the 
ramparts)
  Walk South
  When guard is gone (this is easiest at night) push a 
cannon until it is in front of the door to Lord British's 
room. Now fire the cannon.
  Get the magic carpet. 
  Now leave the castle (do not get caught by the guards, 
they will put you in prison in Yew).
  Now return to the castle (the guards have forgotten about 
your indiscretion with the king's door).
  Talk to everyone (no one tells you anything critical, but 
its a good practice to talk to everyone in a town)
  Get ring of Regeneration and a ring of keys in the 
basement by searching the barrels
  Take all the torches you can. It will not hurt your karma 
to do this.
 
 Britain
  Talk to everyone (here is the gist of what will be said to 
you):
  Talk to Greyson about the Codex and Mantras
  Talk to Eb, the busboy
  Talk to Telila about Gossip
  Talk to Annon at night and get the Word of 
Power
  Talk to Terrance about his Living to get free 
food, and talk about the Times and the 
Shadowlords to learn about the resistance.
  Purchase slings and ready them (ranged weapons are best 
at this point)
  Talk to Gwenno. Allow her to join the party.
 
 Yew
  Talk to Chamfort at Arms of Justice about the Resistance
  Go through the fireplace at Chamfort's and go down the 
passageway
  Talk to Jaana. Allow her to join the party.
  Find the secret door at the end of the hallway and search 
the barrel to get a silver sword.
  At 3 p.m. talk to Landon: tell him the password (Dawn)
  Get reagents at the herb shop. Prepare a lot of An Nox 
and Mani spells.
  Free the prisoners in the stocks (Mario and his son, 
Aleyn)
  Visit the Jail cells. In the left cell, Felespar gives you a 
Word of Power.
  You can buy Food, Keys and Information from Jeremy.
  Return to Chamfort and ask about the Mantra.
 
 Shrine of Justice
  Meditate at the Shrine and get a Shrine quest. (mantra: 
Beh)
 
 Minoc
  Minoc is the bonus spot to gain some experience by 
killing monsters. The healer is free, and there is food to 
be had in Minoc.
  Talk to Rew, the sailmaker, about her Job, the Hours and 
the Weeks. She will sing a song. It contains some 
information, so pay attention. Now ask about Wells and 
Horses.
  Talk to Fiona at the poorhouse. Ask about the Great 
Council and the Word of Power for Covetous.
  Give some coins to the beggar. Now leave and return and 
give some more coins to the beggar. The beggar will give 
you a hint about Shenstone.
  Follow Shenstone from the Darkwatch Armoury around 
11 a.m. to noon. He will walk to a tree (if you know 
where the tree is, you do not need to follow him). Search 
at the tree and get the Skull keys (the keys will 
regenerate every day, so hang around and get about 30 of 
them. Kill some monsters and gain experience while you 
are doing this. Remember, the healer in Minoc is FREE.)
  Talk to Tactus about Judge Dryden in Yew for some plot 
enhancment.

Castle Britannia (again)pg 212
Ok. This is going to tarnish your "Avatarhood" a 
little bit, but do not fret because all this will be 
recoverable. What this will allow you to do is get 
some supplies and good weapons without buying or 
working for them. Actually, it is a lot like theft, 
however, you will be able to repent for it later. You 
do not have to do this to win the game.

  Return to Castle Britannia and go to the basement. Use 
the skull keys to open the treasury door (it has a purple 
border around it). Each time you open a chest, you are 
going to lose some Karma points (hit CTRL-K to check 
your Karma), but this can really be worth it. When you 
are done getting EVERYTHING in the room, go climb 
the up ladder and then climb back down and repeat the 
process again. The goal here is to get some magical axes 
(which can be thrown and used in close quarters) and any 
valuable stuff you can sell. Ready the axes and gather up 
stuff until you are satisfied (this can take as many as 20 
to 25 times). When you are finished, your Karma will 
very likely be zero. Fear not, you can remedy that later. 
Now journey on with your new stuff, and sell anything 
you do not want to keep for some gold (keep the magic 
axes, as you can pass them on to other party members as 
they join).

(NOTE: the Shadowlords NEVER visit the villages of 
Britanny, so they are a safe haven of sorts)
East Britanny
  Talk to Sir Adam and Squire Jimmy to learn about the 
HMS Cape.
  Go to the room in the Eastern end of the Oaken Oar and 
jimmy the lock on the door. Search the chests of drawers 
and get the HMS Cape plans.
  Purchase a Frigate. The alternate way to get a frigate is to 
go near deep water (so the boat comes up so that you can 
engage it in melee combat), and pass until a frigate 
attacks you. Or, if you find a frigate, lead it to a place 
where you can take it on. Once the owners are dead, the 
boat is yours (do not worry about your Karma, these guys 
are pirates, so it has no effect on your Karma).

North Britanny
  Talk to Thentis, a farmer, and ask about the Resistance. 
(the password is Dawn). 
  Meet him by the well at midnight and talk to his friends 
(Joshua, Vigil, and Leof). You will gain some great 
information. Mention the password, Dawn, to loosen 
their lips.
  Search the dead tree and get the gems.

West Britanny
  Talk to everyone, but do not miss Christopher, he will 
spout out an Origin add.

Shrine of the Codex
  Sail to Avatar Isle (South of Moonglow) and visit the 
Codex. NOTE: NEVER visit the Codex unless a Shrine 
sent you there.

Shrine of Justice
  Complete the first Shrine quest by returning to the Shrine 
of Justice.

Minoc (again)
  Give some money to the beggar so you can recover some 
Karma points. You can give as much as you want. Do 
this until your Karma is 50 (doing the Shrine quests will 
give you more later).
  Get some more Skull Keys from the tree.

Shrine of Sacrifice
  Visit the Shrine of Sacrifice in the desert East of Minoc. 
Then visit the Codex; return to the Shrine (do you see the 
pattern?) (mantra: Cah)

Buccaneer's Den
  Talk to Sven and find out about Glass Swords.
  Talk to Scally to learn about the Sextant.
  Talk to Bidney to learn about the Grapple.
  Talk to Geoffrey and he will join your party.
  Visit the Guild of the Broken Lock and make some fine 
purchases.

Shrine of Compassion
  Visit the Shrine to get the quest. (mantra: Mu)

The Lycaeum
  Talk to Lord Shalineth to learn the name of the 
Shadowlord of Falsehood (Faulinei)
  Talk to Lady Janell to learn about the twin sisters in 
Cove and about the Shrine of Spirituality.
  Talk to Sir Sean about Stonegate.

Moonglow
  Talk to Zachariah to learn about comets and Goeth.
  Talk to Lord Stuart to get the food spell.
  Talk to Malik to learn about Saul. You are going to have 
to drag it out, so have patience.
  Talk to Malifora, Maliks's mother, about Words of 
Power, Blackthorn, and anything that comes to mind. 
This lady is full of information.
  Search the barrels in the towers for interesting objects 
(will not affect your Karma)
  Pick up more reagents at the herbalist

Cove
  Talk to Ava and Leona to learn about the Shard of 
Falsehood.
  Talk to Ambrose (after 11 p.m.) at the Healer's to learn 
about Mystic weapons and armor.

Empath Abbey
  Talk to Lord Michael about Love, about Evil, and about 
the Grapple. Get the Grapple.
  Talk to Barbra about her vision (pay close attention, this 
is an important one).
  Talk to Tim to learn about Lord Kenneth and the 
Harpsichord.
  You can pretty much take anything that you find hidden 
in Empath Abbey. It's like a no Karma depletion zone.

Jhelom
  Find a magic axe by opening the hidden door in the NE 
tower. Search the dead tree outside the city walls.
  Talk to Thorne to learn the Mantra of Valor.
  Trian will tell you about Goeth, but you must ask about 
the Word of Power.
  Talk to Goeth and ask about the Drow of Rewop, and ask 
about Noom Senots.

Bordermarch
  Talk to Sir Simon to learn about the Crown, Sceptre, and 
the Amulet.
  Talk to Lady Tessa to learn even more about the Amulet.
  You can get Dupre and Sentri to join your party if you 
have any slots full. It's worth dumping someone to get 
Dupre (he is pretty tough).
  The Shattered Shield has some awesome selection if you 
can afford the goods.

Skara Brae
  Talk to Froed and learn about his imprisoned father 
(Greymarch at Yew). Froed is an agile little guy, but 
running him down is worth it. His father is very thankful 
when you return to Yew and let him know Froed is OK.
  Talk to Saul about his friend, and ask him about 
Mandrake and Nightshade.
  Visit Kindor at the Healer's after 5 p.m. to learn the 
Mantra of Spirituality.
  Get any reagents you may need.
  Talk to Flain (in the tower with the magically locked 
doors. Once you kill some bats, you will be able to climb 
up and have a word with him). You can get him to tell 
you the password for the Oppression, but for him to do 
this, you have to tell him the name of a member of the 
High Council. This is not a good thing (it will hurt your 
virtue, and its just a really creepy thing to do). So, here is 
the password (if you want it): Impera.

Shrine of Valor
  Get the Shrine quest.
  Complete the Shrine quest (go to the Codex, and then 
return to the Shrine of Valor)

Farthing
  Talk to the Great Mage Temme. You do not really need 
the spells she has, but it doesn't hurt to chat with her.
  Talk to Seggallion about the Spyglass. Get the spyglass 
(you can use this to track the Shadowlords. They will 
look like comets)

Greyhaven Lighthouse
  Talk to Lord Kenneth and get some lessons on the 
Harpsichord (the answers are: 678 and 987).
  Talk to David about the Sextant. Flatter him about it, and 
then take it when he offers.

Serpent's Hold
  Talk to Lord Malone about Shadowlords to learn the 
name of the Shadowlord of Cowardice (Nosfentor).
  In the basement, visit the Flame of Courage and talk to 
Gardner about his Visions. He will give you information 
concerning the Shard of Cowardice.
  You can get 5 Skull Keys from Kristi the cook.
  You can get Maxwell to join your party, if you have 
room.
  Talk to Toede, the prisoner, for information about secret 
doors and traps in Blackthorn's Castle.

Trinsic
  Talk to Gruman to get the Mantra of Honor (mantra: 
Summ)
  Get gems from a barrel near the NE corner of the 
battlements.
  Go to the battlements at night and talk to Sindar, the 
sleepwalking wizard. He knows the Word of Power for 
the dungeon Shame.

Paws
  Talk to Glinkie about the method to restore a destroyed 
shrine. You shouldn't need this information, but it is 
possible to destroy a shrine, and if you do it, Glinkie's 
method can make it all better again.
  Talk to Bandaii about the Magic Carpet. He will want to 
talk about Smith, the talking horse.

New Magincia
  Talk to Kaiko to learn about Hassad.
  Talk to Katrina. She will join the party if you have room.
  Talk to Sharita, the grave-tender, to learn about 
Magincia's history.
  Talk to Wartow about Humilty and learn the mantra 
(mantra: Lumm). Pay attention to what he is asking you.

Sutek's Island
  Go South of New Magincia to find Sutek's Island
  Talk to Sutek to learn about the Shards and how to use 
them to destroy the Shadowlords.
  This is another Karma free zone, so take some scrolls 
and potions if you need them.

Shrine Quest Round-up
  Complete the quests for the Shrines of Honor, Humility, 
Spirituality, and Honesty. To get to the Shrine of 
Spirituality, wait until both moons are full and walk into 
a moongate (Minoc is the best to use for this). Complete 
these quests just as you completed the earlier ones (go to 
Shrine, go to Codex, return to Shrine). You can do these 
in any order.

Sin'Vraal
  Find the Daemon Sin'Vraal in the southern desert, just 
West of Dagger Isle.
  Talk to him to learn the name of the Shadowlord of 
Hatred (Astaroth), and the location of the Shard of 
Hatred.

Castle Britannia (again)
  Go to Lord British's room and sit in the chair in front of 
the harpsichord and play the song that Lord Kenneth 
taught you. To do this, just sit in the chair and start 
hitting the correct numbers (678 987 8767653). A secret 
door will open. Get the box that appears.
  DO NOT let Saduj join your party. He will betray you in 
combat.

Serpent's Spine and the Glass Swords
  Climb into the Serpent's Spine from the Northeaster 
foothills to get to the location FA' EA' (it is a patch of 
grass in the middle of the mountain). Now search and 
you will find a Glass Sword. Now equip another player 
with it and search again. You will find another glass 
sword. Equip it to another player and repeat this process 
until everyone has a glass sword. These swords will kill 
anything except for a Shadowlord with one blow, so 
don't waste them. 

Mandrake Root and Nightshade
  Search for Mandrake Root South of Minoc at midnight 
(location DG' LG').
  Search for Nightshade South of Spiritwood at midnight 
(location JF' CO')

Stonegate and the Scepter
  This would be a great time to SAVE THE GAME.
  Stonegate is located deep in the mountains North of the 
rat Grendel's hut (location EK' JE' to be exact). Enter 
the mountain range from the North and climb south and 
the west to find Stonegate. When you get to Stonegate, 
you will face Balinor. You can try to answer his riddle, 
but he's going to fight you anyway.
  If you did not save the game just a little bit ago, this 
would be a VERY STRATEGIC time to save the game. If 
the Shadowlords are still alive (and if you are following 
all of this, they should be) they will be here also. They 
are guarding the Scepter. The Scepter will make the 
dungeon crawling to come much easier, so it is worth the 
risk to get it (it will dispel any magical field). There are a 
number of ways to outsmart and avoid the Shadowlords 
so that you can get the Scepter and run. The best is to use 
the magic carpet, and its superior speed, to outmaneuver 
the Shadowlords. Good luck!

Windemere and the Black Badge
  Now is the time to go to Windemere, just off the tip of 
the Isle of the Avatar (location AI' PI').
  Talk to Elestaria and get the black badge. To do this, ask 
her about the Oppression and give her the  password. If 
you don't have it (and you might not) here it is: Impera. 
Give her the password, and she will give you the badge. 
This will make life in Blackthorn's castle much easier.

Blackthorn's Castle
  If you have the Black Badge, go to the roof and get Lord 
British's Crown. Wear it all the time, as it protects you 
from magic attacks.
  Go to the basement and talk to Hassad. Mention Kaiko 
and he will tell you the Word of Power for the dungeon 
Hythloth.

Dungeon Hythloth (Mystic Weapons and the Shard of 
Cowardice)
  Prepare at least 15 Blink spells (more is much better) 
and stock up on as many gems as you can afford.
  In the Undwerworld, take a path leading northwest from 
Hythloth' exit. Find the Mystic Armor and Weapons in 
the middle of the lava pool (location OJ' OJ'). Keep 
searching until you find them all. Use the gems to find 
your way when you get lost.
  Travel South from Hythloth's exit as far as you can 
walk. Now use a Blink spell to travel west to another 
meadow. Walk northwest, then Blink to the west again. 
Blink west again, then walk a short distance to the west. 
Use another gem to line up then next meadow to the 
north. Blink north, blink north again, into a swampy 
area. Ride the magic carpet to the northeastern tip of the 
area, and blink north one more time. The Shard of 
Cowardice is to the northwest.

Ararat
  Drop a member of your party before going to this area.
  Find a whirlpool and sail into it. The sail southeast until 
you find a waterfall. Go down the falls and you will find 
an island.
  Talk to Captain Johne, and let him join you (he is tough 
and can cast high level spells). He also has some stuff 
worth taking (its another no Karma zone).

Shard of Hatred
  Here is the easy way to get the Shard of Hatred right after 
you recruit Capt. Johne.
  Go northeast as far as you can go, and then Blink east.
  Enter the mountains to the northwest and wind your way 
through the maze, using gems to find your way. You will 
eventually reach the Shard of Hatred.
  You can return via Wrong or Covetous.

Shard of Falsehood
  The shard of falsehood lies in the underworld below the 
dungeon Deceit.  From that entrance to the underworld, 
you should go Southwest across the mountains, then 
northwest at an intersection.  When the path splits, go 
Northeast.  You should soon find a series of waterfalls 
which you should go over, and the shard is on an island 
in the middle of that lake (location: FA' MA').

Getting the Amulet
  Make sure you have some Blink spells and plenty of 
Gems.
  This is in the underworld under the dungeon Destard.  
You can also enter this part of the underworld by falling 
into the underworld through certain waterfalls.  If you 
follow the path of Lord British's last journey, you should 
find it without any problem.  It is east of a vast swamp. 
Follow the path that leads to a large meadow with five 
graves. The amulet is needed in order to provide light in 
the dark region around the final dungeon. If you don't use 
it, you will be trapped in the darkness.

Death to the Shadowlords
  To kill the Shadowlords, you must go to the Lycaeum, 
Serpent's Hold, and Empath Abbey (in any order), stand 
before the Eternal Flame and Yell the appropriate 
Shadowlord's name, wait until he steps into the flame, 
and Use the Shard.
  Serpent's Hold- Yell: Nosfentor and Use the Shard 
of Cowardice
  Lycaeum- Yell: Faulinei and Use the Shard of 
Falsehood
  Empath Abbey- Yell: Astaroth and Use the Shard of 
Hatred

Shame (the Grand Finale)
  NOTE!!! Make sure that your party is FULLY healed 
and loaded to the hilt with all you can find. You must 
also have the following items in your possession: the 
Crown, the Scepter, the Amulet, and the Sandalwood 
Box.
  Enter the underworld under Shame. You must get 
through Shame to get to dungeon Doom. The first room 
in Shame is sort of tricky. You must attack the walls to 
open a passage to the south. Once the passage is open, 
you must Klimb over the rocks. Now just get through 
Shame.

Doom
  This would be an ideal time to SAVE THE GAME and 
hole up and camp to make sure you r party is at its 
strongest.
  To the East of where you emerge (from Shame), there is 
an island covered with lava.  Enter the dark center of the 
island, and use the amulet. Yell 'Veramocor' and enter 
the dungeon Doom. Use the scepter to destroy the 
barriers, and leave the room in any direction (did you 
remember the Scepter? If you did not, I hope you saved 
the game, because there is no way out of this dungeon). If 
you follow along the path of Lord British pretty carefully, 
this dungeon shouldn't be too bad (it does have some 
tricky moments). 

